                                            Petit Muharto
                                             Kartodirdjo
                                           with Jeremy Allan
Bob Freeberg, RI-002, and Indonesia’s Struggle for Freedom
ONE MAN
AIR FORCE
REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FEDERAL STATES
afterhours                                  AU T H O R
                                            Petit Muharto Kartodirdjo
                                            with Jeremy Allan
                                            EDITOR
                                            Adam Fenton
                                            PUBLISHER
                                            Lans Brahmantyo
                                            BOOK DESIGN
                                            Fitriana Valencia Ng
                                            P R I N T I N G S U P E RV I S O R
                                            Reza Inovani Hubner
                                            I S B N 978- 602- 6 9 9 0-18 -1
                                            P R I N T E D I N JA K A R TA , I N D O N E S I A
Any copy of this book issued by the         ©2018. All Rights Reserved.
publisher as a hardcover or paperback is    No part of this publication may be repro-
sold subject to the condition that it shall duced or transmitted in any
not by way of trade or otherwise circulated form or by any means, electronic
without the publisher’s priorconsent in     or mechanical, including photocopy, record-
any form of binding or cover other than     ing or any other information storage and
in which it is published and without a      retrieval system, without prior permission
similar condition including these words     in writing from authors and the publisher.
being imposed on a subsequent purchaser.
ONE MAN
AIR FORCE
     Bob Freeberg, RI-002, and
  Indonesia’s Struggle for Freedom. 
       PETIT MUHARTO
         K ARTODIRDJO
        WITH  JEREMY ALL AN
   CONTENTS
   —
—  PREFACE                       06
—  FOREWORD BY PAMELA HYDE SMITH 12
—  FOREWORD BY DR. R. SUNARYO    14
1  MYSTERY ON MOUNT PUNGGUR      18	
2  BLOCKADE RUNNERS              22
3  THE SIXTH COFFIN              34
4  BIRTH OF RI-002               44
5  INSTITUTIONAL AMNESIA         60
6  A CASE OF QUININE             70
7  JAVANESE CELEBRITY            80
8  DUTCH AGGRESSION              91
9  DOWN AND OUT IN MANILA        97
10 OFFICIAL SOURCES              106
11 NON STOP TO JOGJA             113
12 AN ESSENTIAL LIFELINE         119
13 BOB THE BEST                  126
14 MUSEUM OF MEMORIES            133
15 A MATTER BETWEEN STATES       140
16 FLEDGLINGS                    145
17 BAMBU RUNCING           150
18 OLD AIRMEN'S TALES      158
19 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION  165
20 MISSION TO BAGUIO       173
21 FORGOTTEN HERO          184
22 INTERLUDE IN MANILA     189
23 BLACK FLIGHTS           197
24 BERSIAP                 203
25 PILOTING A DESK         211
26 INDOS                   218
27 NOT READY FOR AIRPLANES 223
28 SENSITIVE THINGS        230
29 SPITE THEIR FACE        239
30 BETRAYAL IN BANTEN      246
31 LAST FLIGHT OF RI-002   253
32 TWO PALEMBANGS          260
33 WESTERLING SWEEP        268
34 SHABBY DRESS            273
—  EPILOGUE                277
        PREFACE
        —
        BY JE RE MY ALLAN
  A charismatic Western adventurer stumbles into a remote Asian
  territory and joins forces with local inhabitants in their struggle
  against warlords, bandits—or his own nation's colonial oppressors.
  This story has been told, time and again, in the crisp pages of seri-
  ous novels and the lurid panels of comic books. But whether literary
  masterpiece or paperback potboiler, in these tales the “natives” only
  serve to provide local color, and their struggle for freedom simply a
  backdrop for the exploits of the “hero”.
        I was introduced to one such story in 1986, when I researched
  the early years of aviation in Indonesia for a series of articles con-
  nected with Indonesia's first international air show. The highlight
  of my research as a wide-ranging and fascinating interview with
  retired Indonesian Air Force Major Petit Muharto Kartodirdjo.
  I sat in his living room, enthralled, as he related his swashbuckling
  adventures as the co-pilot of RI-002, a war-surplus C-47 freight
  airplane owned by a veteran US Navy air ace, Bob Freeberg, as they
  ran the air blockade set up by the Dutch to isolate the newly de-
  clared Republic of Indonesia from outside support. Since each mis-
  sion had been the direct responsibility of the Indonesian Air Force,
  Captain Petit Muharto had served as mission leader and so had sat
  in the right-hand seat as the nominal co-pilot, though he had yet to
  complete flight school. Muharto had flown almost every mission
  of RI-002 until promoted to Major and assigned to administrative
6                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
duties at headquarters. Four months later, RI-002 vanished, along
with Freeberg, his crew, and a quarter ton of gold bullion being
transported for safekeeping in the remote highlands of Sumatra.
      I would encounter the story again in 2009, during the course
of a five-day bicycle ride from Jakarta to Jogjakarta. Nightfall on
the third day found me at a beach resort on the southwest coast. I
soon realized that coincidence had brought me to the same beach
where, six decades before, a huge cargo craft had swept over the
mountains and landed a few dozen meters from the spot where I
now enjoyed a delicious grilled-fish dinner. On that evening in June
1947, Bob Freeberg had lost his way among the mountains of West
Java and been forced to make an emergency landing with only a
few liters of fuel in his tanks.
      While blogging my ride in Jogjakarta several days later, I
searched for images of Freeberg that I had seen in archival collections
a quarter century before, and that might have made their way into
cyberspace. Indeed, among a number of blog posts relating to the In-
donesian Revolution I found the dramatic shot of Freeberg’s aircraft
lifting off from the beach as the improvised runway of meter-square
bamboo mats scattered in the propeller backwash. I e-mailed the per-
son who uploaded the image, mentioning the name Petit Muharto.
      This person soon wrote back, asking: “How did you know
my father?” My correspondent was Eko Muhatma Kartodirdjo, Pe-
tit Muharto’s eldest son. I replied with the details of my long-ago
encounter with his father. Eko responded immediately, the as-
tonishment seeming to leap from the words on the screen
as I read: “So you’re that guy!”
      When we met in Jakarta a few weeks later, Eko told me that
his father had been delighted with my profile of Bob Freeberg, and
had shown the article to numerous friends and colleagues. How-
ever, in doing so he had arrived at the appalling realization that few
                                 PREFACE                                7
  of his compatriots, though highly educated and conversant with
  Indonesian history, were aware of the story of Freeberg and his ser-
  vices to their nation. This experience led Muharto to write his own
  recollections for other Indonesian publications, and then, on his
  retirement, to devote his time to solving the mystery of Freeberg’s
  disappearance, eventually producing a lengthy manuscript. After
  Muharto passed away in March 2000, the family attempted to find
  a publisher, but the economic situation, and Muharto’s stipulation
  that the book first appear in English, the language in which it was
  written, had resulted in repeated rejections.
        Eko handed me a ragged paper binder of photocopied pages. A
  series of housing relocations, a catastrophic computer failure, and
  other organizational missteps meant that Muharto’s work survived
  only on this third-generation photocopy. The smudged characters on
  the cheap copy paper seemed only a few rainy seasons away from
  fading into illegibility. Also, I doubted that the contents were in any
  better condition than the medium. Retired military men of all cul-
  tures are prone to write sunset-years’ memoirs of their exploits. Very
  few rise above turgid, detail-heavy catalogs of logistics, strategy, and
  mess-room politics. I casually leafed through the pages, then sat back
  and gave the tattered manuscript my undivided attention. In these
  words, the ripping yarns of dashing blockade runners had been com-
  plemented by an equally compelling detective story. Years of pains-
  taking research in musty archives and heartbreaking interviews with
  elderly witnesses had revealed Bob Freeberg to have been a pawn in
  the diplomatic intrigue, criminal malfeasance, and political betrayal
  that had accompanied the birth of Muharto’s nation.
        What I held in my hands was no less than the story of Indo-
  nesia itself. During his year as Freeberg’s official (though uncerti-
  fied) co-pilot, Muharto had visited all the Republican-held regions
  of the former Dutch colony, and had realized the enormity of the
8                            ONE MAN AIR FORCE
task of building a viable nation from such a patchwork of cultures
and traditions—and with political agendas ranging from hardline
Stalinism to secular democracy to radical Islamism. Petit Muharto
himself reflected the contradictory nature of his people’s struggle for
self-determination. The beneficiary of a Dutch education in schools
for selected children of the “native” elite, he had firmly believed that
his new nation should be administered by fellow graduates—the
best and brightest of the indigenous upper crust slipping into the
polished shoes of the colonial civil service. But Muharto had also
embodied the romanticism that fueled the struggle at ground level:
the passionate fervor that drove village youths to attack Dutch po-
sitions armed only with pointed sticks; the right stuff that embold-
ened novice pilots to harass Dutch facilities by lobbing bombs from
the cockpits of decrepit Japanese biplanes; and the stoic determina-
tion that helped millions of common people endure fearful priva-
tion to keep alive the dream of a free Indonesia.
      Muharto had seen these noble ideals fade over the years as
regional, social, and political self-interest threatened the integrity of
his still-inchoate nation. He had been particularly incensed at how
the narrative of the founding of the nation had been hijacked by the
military officers who had assumed power as the civilian government
imploded through corruption and incompetence in the 1960s. By
exploiting the penchant for forgetting most of their history and my-
thologizing the rest, they had recast the struggle for independence
as solely the work of village boys attacking Dutch positions with
their pointed sticks, disregarding the essential role played by the
Air Force in connecting the Republic’s far-flung outposts, and the
contributions of foreign sympathizers like Bob Freeberg. By solving
the mystery of Freeberg’s disappearance, definitively refuting Dutch
accusations that he had betrayed the Republic, Muharto not only
wished to clear his friend’s name and assure his place in Indonesian
                                PREFACE                                   9
   history, he also hoped to remind a new generation of the values that
   drove the creation of their nation, values that were not exclusively
   Indonesian, but shared by all decent people in the world.
         I could now understand the family’s steadfast determination
   to publish the manuscript. Since I had been largely (if inadvertently)
   responsible for initiating the project, Eko proposed that I take over
   as co-author and do whatever was necessary to see the book through
   to publication. That would require an extensive rewrite, but not be-
   cause of any lack of literary ability on Muharto’s part. He had feared,
   quite reasonably, that his revisionist history, in which an American
   free-booting pilot is shown to have played an indispensable role in
   founding the nation, would have raised rabid howls of jingoist out-
   rage. To ensure that his conclusions would be analyzed critically and
   dispassionately, Muharto presented results of his research with me-
   ticulous care, fully documented and cross-referenced, and expressed
   in English, a language Muharto had mastered in childhood.
         This posed a serious dilemma. Working from an English
   source, I did not have the natural leeway afforded a translator. A
   cursory comparison of the book with Muharto’s magazine articles
   (now readily available on the Internet) would indicate that I had
   made significant changes to the book. I could openly acknowledge
   my contribution, in effect reducing Muharto to little more than a
   researcher, but in doing so I would destroy the essential value of the
   book to Indonesians. For my depiction of this seminal period of na-
   tional history would certainly be derided as the story of Indonesia
   being told, yet again, by some arrogant foreigner.
         I met Petit Muharto when he was in his mid sixties, and saw
   that he embodied every ageist stereotype of a lively older man: he
   was sprightly, he twinkled. He had also been an engaging racon-
   teur, so Eko and I had little difficulty recreating from our memo-
   ries the scathing critiques and wry observations (and scandalous
10                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
adventures) he had so candidly expressed in private conversation
but had omitted from the printed manuscript. With the addition
of some historical background for the sake of readers unfamiliar
with the period, and an epilogue (ably written by Eko) covering
events from Muharto’s death to the date of publication, we finally
had a publishable book. I may be credited as co-author of One
Man Air Force, but the story, and the voice that tells it, wholly be-
longs to Petit Muharto Kartodirdjo.
                            PREFACE                                   11
         FOREWORD
         —
         BY PAM E LA H Y D E SMI TH , U . S AMB ASS A D O R (R E T. )
         O C TO BER 2 0 1 1
   When Petit Muharto Kartodirjo—ramrod straight, sharp as a tack
   and with a grandfatherly twinkle in his eye—sought assistance at
   the U.S. Embassy in Jakarta one day in the early 1990s, I was Press
   Attaché and the lucky recipient of his visit. His tale of his friend,
   the dashing American pilot Bob Freeberg, captured my imagina-
   tion. Bob Freeberg sounded remarkable, an American hero who
   died of mysterious, possibly nefarious causes while making one of
   the daring flights that helped the new nation of Indonesia establish
   itself right after World War II. I also believed that Bob Freeberg’s
   tale represented an early symbol of U.S.-Indonesian friendship and
   something about which both nations could be proud.
         One Man Air Force presents the story of Bob Freeberg’s ex-
   traordinary feats of courage, altruism and flying skill exactly as
   Petit Muharto told them to me in person. It is uncanny that Pe-
   tit Muharto’s voice seems to come out of the pages of this book.
   I have been pleased to see that a second, equally fascinating tale,
   that of Petit Muharto’s touching and determined effort to find
   out what really happened to his friend, twines with the story of
   Freeberg’s Indonesian adventures.
         Such adventures they were: ferrying Soekarno, the head-of-
   state-to-be, in and out of Indonesian territory during the revolution
   against Dutch colonialism, “black flights” carrying contraband to
   arm the Indonesian rebels, possible double-dealing on all sides, a
12                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
crash in densely forested tropical mountains, the unexplained dis-
appearance of a horde of gold, and fragmentary evidence that Free-
berg was imprisoned and disappeared by the Dutch. Petit Muharto
often accompanied Bob Freeberg on his missions, but fortunately
did not copilot his fateful last flight. Persistent dead-ends during
Petit Muharto’s later research only made the story more compelling.
      While in Jakarta, our U.S. Information Service (USIS) office
in the U.S. Embassy was able to provide Petit Muharto with the
leads that connected him with Freeberg’s family in Kansas. When I
returned to Washington in the mid-1990s, I spent many absorbing
hours at the U.S. National Archives, tracking down the diplomatic
dispatches and Congressional correspondence that shed some light
on Freeberg’s disappearance and the U.S. Government’s efforts to
determine what happened to him. Unfortunately, the historical re-
cords were inconclusive, but One Man Air Force reveals that they
provided Petit Muharto with some of the clues that enabled him to
make a very good guess about of Freeberg’s fate while exonerating
in his mind any doubts about Freeberg’s honor.
      I am happy to admit that Petit Muharto’s own wisdom and
integrity won me to his cause every bit as much as the thrill of
sleuthing and the appeal of strengthening U.S.-Indonesian historical
ties. We stayed in touch over the years, and now that he has passed
away I still communicate with his family. It is an honor to have been
asked by Petit Muharto’s son to introduce One Man Air Force to an
Indonesian, American and wider audience.
                             FOREWORD                                 13
         FOREWORD
         —
         BY DR. R.SU N ARYO, AI R V I C E MARSH A L L , T N I ( R E T. )
         1997. JA K ARTA
   The story you are about to read is unique in several ways. It is not
   fiction, not a novel nor a narration of made-up events. It is like a jig-
   saw of real occurrences of which the author is very keen to uncover
   the missing pieces and in so doing lift the veil of mystery surround-
   ing his good friend’s untimely exit from this world.
         It is exactly that mystery that has haunted the author for the last
   forty years, obsessing him to find out the truth and bring about a fast
   and fair final disposal of the unfinished case. While reading the story
   you probably will also be intrigued by the strange lack of customary
   official handling of a case of such importance, rife with national in-
   terest of emotion, political as well as material and military in nature.
         They began in 1947 when an intrepid American former Navy
   pilot agreed to fly blockade runs to and from Jogjakarta and other
   parts of the fledgling republic, braving odds and uncharted hazards at
   the urging of an equally intrepid freedom fighter: Petit Muharto, the
   author of this book. After flying many missions together, respectively
   captain and co-pilot of the eventually ill-fated Dakota that bore the
   proud designation RI-002, the two men, initially driven by different
   motives, became good friends. The American, Bob Freeberg, had at
   the outset undoubtedly his own personal motives to embark on this
   exotic adventure, but in the course of daring dangers and achieving
   results together the original diverging motivations gradually van-
   ished, making way for one shared objective: success of the mission.
14                            ONE MAN AIR FORCE
So when in October 1948 RI-002 was declared lost in South Sumatra
while flying a mission for the Republic, Freeberg, who was captaining
the plane (this time without Muharto as co-pilot) was mourned by his
Indonesian friends as a great national loss. Consequently when due to
a seeming lack of official concern on both Indonesian and Dutch sides
as to what actually did happen to the plane, occupants, and precious
gold cargo, speculations arose, some of which pointing suspecting
fingers at to parties who were in power at the time of the presumed
crash until the discovery of the wreckage thirty years later. This au-
thor became highly motivated to act and try to unravel the mystery.
      The story as recounted in this book is the result of his exhaus-
tive research diligently and stubbornly pursued over many years,
delving into archives and libraries at home, in The Netherlands and
the United States, contacting Freeberg’s next-of-kin, former friends,
and every possible source of information. Some retrieved new data
shed more light on Freeberg’s background but most items uncov-
ered during the research ironically compounded the mystery, adding
more missing pieces to the jigsaw.
      Shortly after the presumed crash the Dutch Army launched
a large-scale attack on Republican territories, and the following
months were hectic with armed conflicts and diplomatic battles,
culminating in the international recognition of the Republic. The
ensuing euphoria and new national priorities might explain the less-
than-appropriate attention to RI-002, but the official negligence in
dispatching the remnants of the wreckage and crew (Freeberg’s in
particular) in 1978 is still in need of clarification. The story ends
with an unvoiced invitation to the readers to make their own judg-
ment and offer suggestions as to what further action may be taken
to arrive at an acceptable conclusion, so that the dark blot on the
history of Indonesia’s struggle for independence will be adequately
elucidated and fairly dealt with.
                               FOREWORD                                15
         1
         MYSTERY ON
         MOUNT PUNGGUR
         —
         JAKARTA
         September 1989
   One afternoon in April 1978, two subsistence farmers tramped
   along the rugged slopes of Mount Punggur on the Indonesian is-
   land of Sumatra in search of land suitable for the ancient practice of
   swidden rice cultivation. Once they had found a patch of land with
   a sufficient covering of topsoil and a convenient source of water,
   they would chop down any trees and set fires to burn the wood and
   other vegetation, creating a nutrient-rich ash which they would mix
   into the soil. After two or three crops had depleted the soil, the farm-
   ers would move on to other land and allow the native vegetation to
   regrow. After a few years they would return to repeat the cycle.
         This system, which had served the peoples of Sumatra well for
   centuries, was now collapsing. Alip bin Dalahir and Tamirsan bin
   Muhar had walked more than one hundred kilometers from their
   home in the Lahat region into these remote highlands as they could
   no longer secure a sufficient livelihood from their ancestral land
   holdings. Three decades after Indonesians had forcefully wrested
   independence from their colonial masters in The Netherlands, farm-
   ers like Alip and Tamirsan still struggled to maintain a meager ex-
   istence, compelled to make arduous, days-long expeditions into the
   Bukit Barisan in search of new land to clear and till.
18                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      On the third day of their current journey, after yet another
difficult scramble up a jagged cliff face, they found their goal—as
long as a source of water lay nearby. The two farmers descended
into an adjacent ravine looking for a stream or indications of a
spring. Halfway down the slope, Alip stumbled over a metal object,
a rusted wheel rim. He and Tamirsan stopped and looked around.
Similar fragments of rusted metal were strewn over the slope.
      Being strangers to the area (and therefore naturally subject to
suspicion), they did not contact local authorities, concerned that
they would be somehow held responsible for what they had discov-
ered. Instead, they hurried back to Lahat. Safe in their home terri-
tory, they reported their adventure to Rusli Asrul, the village head.
A junior navy officer assigned to civilian administrative duty as part
of the parallel military administration that extended throughout the
archipelago, Rusli took immediate responsibility for investigating
and reporting the discovery. The two farmers guided Rusli back to
the site. A thorough search of the area turned up more metal frag-
ments that Rusli recognized as parts of an aircraft. Rusli noted that
a wing segment was marked with an insignia starting with the let-
ters “RI”, indicating an aircraft registered in the Republic of Indo-
nesia. The three collected whatever objects lying on the surface that
they could easily carry, including fragments of human bones in an
advanced state of decay, and returned to Lahat.
      There, Rusli reported the discovery to his superior at the dis-
trict naval station. The officer decided that the Air Force would be
the appropriate branch of the service to investigate the discovery,
so he contacted Major Victor Panggabean, the commander of the
Talang Betutu Air Force base near Palembang, a five-hour drive east.
Panggabean asked Rusli to bring Alip and Tamirsan, along with the
objects they had recovered, to Talang Betutu.
      Like many senior officers, Victor Panggabean had a keen in-
terest in Indonesian military history. On inspecting the objects re-
                     MYSTERY ON MOUNT PUNGGUR                          19
   covered from the site: a rusted electric dynamo, two hand guns,
   parts of a radio transmitter, Panggabean surmised that the farm-
   ers had found the wreckage of RI-002, an Indonesian Air Force
   C-47 transport that had disappeared while on a mission over
   southern Sumatra on 1 October 1948.
         Panggabean was quite familiar with the story of RI-002, a
   war-surplus Dakota contracted by the Indonesian Air Force in 1947
   to run the blockade imposed by the Dutch colonial military. The
   owner and pilot, Bob Freeberg was an American veteran navy pilot
   who, at the time, had gained legendary status for his exceptional
   skill, bravery and (equally important for Indonesians) his modesty
   and willingness to endure the same physical discomforts as the In-
   donesians during those years of struggle.
         On the afternoon of 1 October 1948, RI-002 took off from
   Branti airstrip near the southern tip of Sumatra, carrying two hun-
   dred and fifty kilograms of gold bullion. The flight plan called for
   Bob to fly to Bengkulu on the west coast, and then on to the Repub-
   lican stronghold of Bukittinggi. RI-002 never arrived in Bengkulu.
   The fate of RI-002 remained a mystery for three decades until the
   chance discovery of the wreckage on Mount Punggur, which lay
   near the usual flight path from Branti to Bengkulu.
         Panggabean assembled a field investigation team whom the
   farmers and Rusli would lead back to the site. He instructed the
   team leader, Flight Lieutenant Sulaeman, to photograph the wreck-
   age, recover as many human remains and other artifacts as pos-
   sible, and to write up a full report on his findings. Panggabean knew
   that the disappearance of RI-002 had been one of the many un-
   solved mysteries of Indonesia's fight for independence. He had high
   hopes that after three decades, the true story of the last flight of
   RI-002 might finally be revealed.
20                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      A decade after these events, as I read Sulaeman's report, I was
saddened to remember that the story the final flight of RI-002 re-
mained a mystery. The investigation of the wreckage had not re-
vealed why an aircraft in top condition with an extraordinarily skill-
ful pilot at the controls had crashed into a remote mountain. There
was no indication, either, of what had happened to the gold cargo.
      I had an intensely personal interest in this obscure event in my
nation's history, for I had been copilot of RI-002. For almost a year,
until I was promoted to Major and reassigned to an administra-
tive position at Air Force headquarters, I flew shoulder-to-shoulder
(almost literally in the cramped Dakota cockpit) with Bob Freeberg
as we dodged Dutch air patrols to connect Jogjakarta, the besieged
capital of the Republic of Indonesia, with regional centers of resis-
tance and with other independent nations.
      During the course of my many careers, as an educator, soldier,
diplomat, and businessman, I have met outstanding military com-
manders, powerful captains of industry, and distinguished statesmen.
But none made quite the impression as did Bob Freeberg. Hardly a
month has gone by that I have not reminisced about the adventures
we shared as daring young men running the Dutch blockade in Bob's
rattling, war-surplus freight plane; the first aircraft to proudly bear
the RI designation, our declaration to the world of aviation that the
Republic of Indonesia was a free, sovereign nation.
      When I retired in 1989, I decided to make productive use of my
now-abundant free time by investigating the mystery of RI-002. I
was certain that, with perseverance and luck, I could write the final
chapter of the story of Bob Freeberg, a tale that began one morning
in July 1946 when I called on Air Commander Suryadi Suryadarma
at his office on Maguwo air base in Jogjakarta to offer my services
to the fledgling Air Force of the Republic of Indonesia.
                     MYSTERY ON MOUNT PUNGGUR                           21
          2
          BLOCKADE
          RUNNER
          —
          JO G JAKA RTA — SI N GAP ORE
          July 1946 – March 1947
         “I don't know what rank I should award you. And, please,
   don't expect to be trained as a pilot. There are many other duties
   for which I don't have the right people yet.”
          This was not the reply I had been expecting. For all of my
   life, even now, when air travel is as routine as taking a bus, I have
   looked skyward whenever I hear the distinctive drone of an air-
   craft in flight. In colonial times, the source of that stirring sound
   would have had Dutch markings. During the difficult years of the
   Japanese occupation, I would have seen the red sun of Japan on
   the fuselage. During the first months of peace, the airplane would
   have borne the insignia of RAF units repatriating European in-
   ternees and allied prisoners of war.
          But on a day in March 1946, I looked up to a sight for which
   I had been totally unprepared. At the time, I was in the propa-
   ganda section of the Indonesian Army, stationed in the central Java
   town of Salatiga. In accordance with my (inflated) rank of Lieu-
   tenant Colonel, I would travel to nearby Jogjakarta, the Republi-
   can capital, to liaise with senior officials in the civilian government.
          As I stood on the expansive, neatly trimmed grass field in front
   of the presidential palace, I saw a biplane sporting the Republican
22                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
red-and-white flag. I learned later that it was a pilot-training craft
left behind after the Japanese surrender and repatriation. Most of
the airworthy planes then stationed in Indonesia had been flown
back to Japan. Those that remained had been deemed unsuitable
for military purposes, or simply too unsafe to fly.
      The pilot was Augustinus Adisucipto, one of only three In-
donesian nationals with formal aviation qualifications. He had
selected the aircraft that he considered to be the least likely to fall
from the sky, converted the rising sun logo into the red-and-white
Republican flag, and named the craft the Banteng, Wild Bull. A
much-reproduced painting depicts Adisucipto as the epitome of
an early air ace: sporting a leather helmet, goggles, and wind-
blown scarf as he flies a spindly aircraft “by the seat of his pants”.
      I watched, enthralled, as the Banteng soared above the roof-
tops. My self-control vanished, and I wept. For I then realized
that we were no longer a nation of coolies fit only to toil under
the paternal guidance of the Dutch. If we had an airplane, that
was the beginnings of an air force. And if we had an air force, to
go with our army, then we had the means to defend our new na-
tion. In my heart, I flew with that pilot as he made graceful turns
above Jogjakarta and vowed that I would find a way to leave my
desk job and serve my nation in the sky.
      Four months later, I found an excuse to resign my army com-
mission and apply to the Air Force, only to be offered yet another
desk-bound position. Suryadarma wanted to take advantage of
my experience in army propaganda by putting me in charge of the
(one-man) office of “Air-Mindedness Propagation”. This would
involve little more than public relations and recruitment. In ad-
dition, I would be demoted to captain, admittedly a rank more
appropriate to my experience and responsibilities.
      I hid my disappointment and discussed with Suryadarma
how I might serve my nation by piloting a desk. The organiza-
                          BLOCKADE RUNNER                               23
   tion he commanded had been in existence for only three months.
   Indeed, the very concept of military aviation was unfamiliar to
   most Indonesians, who seldom, if ever, had seen any type of
   aircraft. I knew that the Air Force, like our newly born nation,
   faced the herculean task of building a functioning organization
   with wholly inadequate human and physical resources in an en-
   vironment ravaged by three years of enemy occupation. Sury-
   adarma required an able, multilingual administrator far more
   than yet another would-be air ace.
         I soon came to realize how essential my task might be. The
   former Netherlands East Indies consisted of many thousands
   of islands scattered across an area larger than Europe. Regions
   sympathetic to the Republican government were separated from
   the core territory of the Republic by populations who remained
   staunchly loyal to their erstwhile colonial masters. Aviation of-
   fered the best opportunity to connect these outlying areas with
   the central government and keep tabs on the Dutch.
         At least this position enabled me to meet many people, young
   and old, who shared my interest in aviation. But the job offered
   no excitement. Nevertheless, I decided to bide my time and fulfill
   my duties with diligence, for I held the strong belief that once you
   are in the Air Force, sooner or later you will fly.
         Subsequent events would dash these dreams of flight. In De-
   cember 1946, the Dutch set up a tight air-and-sea cordon around
   Republican-administered areas of the archipelago, the opening
   salvo in their military efforts to lock down control of the entire
   East Indies. The ostensible purpose of the blockade was to curb
   the smuggling of firearms to the “rebels”. Gun-running was only
   slightly affected. The semi-piratical traders of the archipelago had
   centuries of experience spiriting contraband under the noses of the
   Dutch and British. But the blockade did manage to choke off most
   legitimate commercial activity in Republican-controlled regions.
24                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      This was a hard blow. Three years of wartime restrictions on
international trade had depleted the archipelago of every neces-
sity of life not grown on our own soil or fashioned with our own
hands. As trade resumed after the war, we scrambled to import
such products as textiles to replace the garments worn to rags
through three years of constant use. When the blockade choked
off those imports, we were compelled, yet again, to fall back on
our own resources. We made everything from postage stamps,
army badges, and train tickets to clothing and building materials
from whatever materials were at hand.
      Critical materials such as medicine for our sick and injured,
spare parts for our automobiles and public utilities, and radios to
connect us with the outside world were beyond our capacity to
manufacture, no matter how inventive we might be. To keep our
republic fully functioning, we would have to somehow purchase
these items abroad and sneak them past the vigilant Dutch. We
would have to become blockade runners.
      One victim of the Dutch blockade was my elder brother,
Peded Muhardi Kartodirdjo, a captain in the Indonesian Navy.
The blockade had paralyzed our sister force: Dutch ships were
waiting to pounce whenever one of our handful of reconditioned
Japanese patrol boats attempted to steam out of port. Mas Ded,
as we called him, was now, like me, relegated to a desk job. In
January 1947, one of his friends, an ethnic Chinese businessman
named Tan who had clan connections throughout the region, sug-
gested he resign his commission and come with him to Australia.
      Our southern neighbor had proven to be a staunch support-
er of our cause. The Australians were now running a blockade of
their own—against the Dutch. The powerful dockworker's union,
with the support of other labor organizations, were refusing to
load Dutch ships berthed in Australian harbors in a bid to pre-
                          BLOCKADE RUNNER                           25
   vent returning colonial forces from shipping military supplies to
   Indonesia. Tan believed that this opened significant opportunities
   for trade between Australia and the Republic.
         Mas Ded could not accept the invitation as he had recently
   married and could not leave his wife. He suggested that I take his
   place. Tan agreed, and Suryadarma gave his blessings—with the
   condition that I bring back as many licenses in aviation as possible.
         Tan and I made our way overland from Jogjakarta to the
   north coast port of Cirebon, where we boarded a boat for the
   trip across the Java Sea to Singapore. As expected, a Dutch pa-
   trol stopped us shortly after we had left Cirebon harbor. I had
   disguised myself as a lowly engine-room hand. I was taking a
   grave risk: the slightest detail might expose me as a member
   of the educated native elite. One of the armed boarding party
   might notice the lack of callouses on my hands, or a phrase of
   formal Dutch might escape my lips in my nervousness. Any of a
   dozen potential mistakes might end my journey while still with-
   in sight of the Java coastline.
         The boarding party made a thorough search of the cargo
   hold, finding only sugar and coffee beans. They checked the iden-
   tification papers of all passengers, including Tan. Ethnic Chinese
   residents of Java were assumed to be pro-Dutch, so the board-
   ing party accepted his explanation that he was en-route to Singa-
   pore for legitimate trading purposes. The sailors barely glanced
   at me as I squatted on my haunches near the engine-room hatch,
   my eyes downcast in the attitude of submission that all inland-
   ers assumed in Dutch presence. They let us continue, and after a
   few days we reached Singapore.
         And there my journey ended. Tan and I discovered that we
   could not leave Singapore without Dutch papers. As a commit-
   ted Republican, I had no intention of trying to secure a Dutch
   passport. Tan had no such compunctions and soon secured
26                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
Dutch-sponsored travel documents, enabling him to continue
on to Australia. I was trapped in Singapore, my only option to
smuggle myself back to Java. I was reluctant to return to Jog-
jakarta and resume my mundane duties as a desk-bound ad-
ministrator, so I delayed my departure and hoped I could some-
how serve our struggle from afar.
      I soon made contact with Republican-friendly Indone-
sians in the British colony. Most were university students who
had opted to join the struggle rather than continue their studies.
Some were involved in the busy clandestine barter trade. Others
concentrated on public relations or procurement of war mate-
rials. Well-dressed and urbane, they seemed to be the antithesis
of the rag-tag militants in their homeland. But they did share
our passionate conviction for Indonesian self-determination,
and were willing to donate significant amounts of time, energy,
and personal funds to the cause.
      The tight Dutch naval blockade had stifled most communi-
cation between Singapore and Republican-held territories in Java
and Sumatra. Largely ignorant of the situation on the ground, the
Singapore-based partisans were desperate to open new channels of
communication. Someone suggested we try to interest air-transport
companies to fly to Jogjakarta. We thought this unfeasible, consid-
ering the non-existent status of our republic in the world of interna-
tional aviation. But with few other options, we tried our luck and
approached several private air charter companies. We were sur-
prised and delighted to be met with universally positive responses.
      The first to express serious interest was CALI, the air
charter company Bob had joined a few months earlier. They
jumped at the chance to pioneer a new route in the boom-
ing East Asian aviation market.
      As I was the only aviation man among the partisans in Sin-
gapore, my colleagues turned to me to help solve the consider-
                         BLOCKADE RUNNER                               27
   able logistics and technical issues we faced. The most crucial was
   the availability of aviation fuel in Jogjakarta, as a Dakota could
   not carry sufficient fuel supplies for a round trip. The two 1200
   horsepower Pratt & Whitney R-1830 radial engines driving the
   C-47s used by CALI required 100-octane fuel, known as avigas
   and available at international airports over the globe. But Re-
   publican airfields could supply only 92-octane fuel. However, the
   many types of Republican aircraft had logged thousands of hours
   on this fuel since 1946 with no engine failures. When I explained
   the situation, the CALI captains elected to compromise. In Jog-
   jakarta, they would transfer the remaining Singapore avigas to
   the auxiliary tanks for use during the critical takeoff and land-
   ing phases of the return flight, and fill the main tanks with our
   92-octane fuel to use for cruising. With that and other technical
   concerns settled, we were ready to go.
        The historic first international commercial flight into the Re-
   public of Indonesia departed from Kalang airfield, at the time Singa-
   pore's civil airport, on 23 February 1947. The crew consisted of Cap-
   tain Sam Terry, First Officer Vic Duzon, and even a flight attendant,
   an attractive Filipina I knew as Miss Brown. Terry was an American
   Air Force veteran while Duzon was a Philippines Air Force captain
   and a check pilot for his nation's civil-aviation authority.
         Despite the exceptional competence of the crew and the
   cheering presence of the comely Miss Brown, I worried about
   the flight. Interception was not my primary concern: chances of
   encountering Dutch patrols were slight. Even if we were spot-
   ted, I was certain that a Dutch fighter pilot would not fire on
   a civilian aircraft bearing international registration. I was more
   worried about our own forces on the ground. There was no func-
   tioning two-way radio in Jogjakarta, and all telephone and tele-
   graph communication passed through Dutch-controlled facilities
   in Batavia. With no method of announcing our intended arrival,
   ground forces might fire on us during our approach.
28                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
                   Sam Te r r y (le ft ), cap t ain
                 of t he firs t CA LI b lock ade
                      r un t o Jogjak ar t a, w it h
                         Indone s ian A ir Force
                   C ap t ain R . Mant ir i, C A LI
                Firs t O ffice r Cap t ain V ict or
                  Dizon, and Indone s ian A ir
                       Force C ap t ain Ge orge
                                     R e une ke r .
BLOCKADE RUNNER                                      29
         Fortunately, Captains Terry and Duzon devised a solution.
   As we approached Maguwo, we extended our landing gear at a
   higher altitude than usual and Duzon played with the propeller
   pitch controls to produce an alternating high and low drone from
   the engines, a maneuver that no enemy would have reason to per-
   form. Their plan was successful. As we approached the runway,
   a green flag was raised on the pole beside the control shack, the
   signal that were were cleared to land.
         I could see the runway was lined with a dense crowd of on-
   lookers, mostly in civilian dress. As soon as the Dakota had rolled
   to a stop on the parking apron it was engulfed in people. We had
   arrived during an air show: the latest in a series of events orga-
   nized by the Air Force to raise morale.
         The foreign crew were astonished, and delighted, to be
   considered the highlight of the show. The crowd erupted in
   a full-throated cheer when we opened the door and jumped
   down onto the tarmac. Suryadarma approached and formally
   welcomed the crew to the Republic of Indonesia. He then took
   me aside for a quick debriefing. As was customary among the
   military during the revolution, Suryadarma did not thank me
   for my role in organizing this groundbreaking flight, but the
   smiles on the faces of those around us was gratitude enough.
   For the crew, this was just another charter flight. But for the
   people of Indonesia, we were a harbinger of hope from the out-
   side world, a long-awaited sign that the Dutch must certainly
   fail to quench the fire of revolution.
         The historic CALI flights opened the eyes of many aviation
   companies in Southeast Asia and beyond. During subsequent
   weeks a number of aircraft landed in Jogjakarta, including a
   second CALI flight captained by Dan Cardwell. Many had been
   chartered by Indonesians residing abroad or by affluent foreign-
   ers who sympathized with the Republic.
30                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Notable among these wealthy sympathizers was Bijayanand-
ha ‘Biju’ Patnaik, an Indian businessman and close friend of Jawa-
harial Nehru, future prime minister of India. His Dakota, bearing
the call sign VT-CLA, made numerous flights to Jogjakarta car-
rying medicine, food, textiles and other goods in critically short
supply in the isolated capital. Biju Patnaik himself several flights,
providing an informal but important liaison between our leaders
and their counterparts in India, then in the process of securing
their own independence from the British.
      The clearly humanitarian nature of these missions prompted
the Dutch to permit over-flights to Republican territory—as long
as the aircraft landed first at a Dutch-controlled airfield such as
Batavia or Surabaya for cargo inspection. While Singapore air-
traffic control dutifully informed all pilots of this requirement, few
flights to Jogjakarta bothered to comply with the Dutch demand.
      The humanitarian flights also prompted a number of compa-
nies and private individuals to seek formal aviation-services con-
tracts with the new nation. All failed, for a simple reason. In 1947,
the Republic of Indonesia was a nation under siege, with neither
the financial resources nor political stability required to enter into
mutually satisfactory contractual arrangements.
      At this stage, a more unorthodox approach was needed to
continue our blockade runs. An innovative solution invariably re-
quires an exceptional person for implementation. In March 1947,
I would meet such a person: Bob Freeberg.
      Bob served as pilot on the third and final CALI flight from
Singapore to Jogjakarta, which took place during the first week of
March 1947. I met Bob at Kalang Airport shortly before the flight.
He was a tall, full-bodied man, of similar age to me. I was struck
by his sharp blue eyes, which can be intimidating to Asians ac-
customed to meeting only brown-eyed people. But those eyes were
set in a cheerful, friendly face. When he spoke, his voice was au-
                           BLOCKADE RUNNER                             31
   thoritative, but quiet and measured. To me, Bob evoked the heroic
   ideal of Javanese mythology: large and powerful, a formidable op-
   ponent, but gentle and well-mannered when not on the battlefield.
         The outbound leg from Singapore, following the route taken
   by the two previous flights, was uneventful, except for a brief
   period of tension flying over the Java heartland. As we passed
   Mount Slamet and flew along the Serayu valley, our aircraft en-
   countered a dense overcast. Bob descended until we dropped
   from the clouds. But now we were flying lower than many of the
   surrounding peaks, and the limited visibility increased the risk of
   a controlled flight into terrain.
         As on the previous flights, I stood in the cockpit between the
   two seated pilots. Bob asked my advice. I studied the details of the
   ground flashing by a few hundred meters beneath us. I believed
   that we were a short distance north of Kutoarjo, which is on the
   main railway line connecting Jogjakarta with the rest of Java. In-
   deed, a few seconds later the rails came into view, clearly visible at
   this low altitude. I suggested Bob follow the rail line east. Fifteen
   minutes later we were flying over Jogjakarta, descending toward
   a safe landing at Maguwo air base.
         Like the first two CALI flights, this was essentially a stan-
   dard commercial charter; at least for the outbound leg. The return
   journey, however, was highly unorthodox. I asked Bob if we could
   make two diversions en route to Singapore. My first request was
   to fly to the small town of Karangendah in southern Sumatra. The
   Japanese had built an airstrip there, which we had now taken over.
   The base seemed to have been intended for fighters and other small
   aircraft: there were no records of an aircraft the size of a Dakota
   landing at Karangendah. Air Force command wanted Bob to sur-
   vey the strip from the air and, preferably, attempt a landing.
         The second request was to make a significant diversion to
   Bukittinggi, a town in the western highlands of central Sumatra.
32                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
The Japanese had built an airstrip at the nearby village of Gadut.
But there would be no test landing here: the strip, neglected since
the end of the war, was overgrown and pot-holed. Instead, we
carried two Air Force engineers who would parachute into the
village and recruit local residents to repair the strip, giving the
Republic a vital administration and logistic base in Sumatra.
      Though these high-risk tasks are more properly the duties of
a military force, not a commercial airline, Bob readily agreed. We
landed safely on the runway at Karangendah and could see no
difficulty in taking off again; to our great relief, since the airstrip
was, to use Bob's phrase, “smack in the middle of nowhere”.
      Also uneventful was the parachute drop into the highland
valley near Bukittinggi. Fortunately, the CALI Dakotas were all
war-surplus transports, lacking insulation and upholstery, but re-
taining military modifications such as a rear door that could be
opened in flight to accommodate paratroopers. The drop was per-
fectly executed, thanks to Bob's wartime training and experience.
      After landing in Singapore, I thanked Bob for his coopera-
tion, praised his piloting skills and looked forward to flying with
him on a future blockade run. Bob replied that he would soon be
resigning from CALI, as he had bought his own aircraft and was
now readying it for charter service. As we parted, I wished him
the best on his new venture. I could not guess that we would soon
meet again, and in a most surprising fashion.
                          BLOCKADE RUNNER                               33
        3
        THE SIXTH
        COFFIN
        —
        JO G JAKA RTA
        September 1989 – April 1990
   Five flag-draped coffins are arranged with military precision on
   a parade ground of the Tanjung Karang Air Force base in south-
   ern Sumatra. They are awaiting transport to the nearby Taman
   Pahlawan Tanjung Karang, one of the many final resting places
   for national heroes: military personnel and civilians deemed to
   have made exceptional contributions to their nation. The four air-
   men and one civilian official honored on that day, 29 July 1978,
   certainly deserved this great honor, as they comprised the crew of
   the last flight of RI-002. That flight had carried a significant por-
   tion of the national treasury, a quarter ton of gold bullion, being
   transferred to relative safety in the highland town of Bukittinggi.
        The remains had been retrieved from the crash site on
   Mount Punggur during the second expedition of the Air Force
   investigators. They had been able to set up camp and stay for
   several days, making an exhaustive survey of the area and un-
   earthing components of the aircraft that had been buried by
   earth movements during the three decades since RI-002 had
   slammed into the mountainside. The team did not have the re-
   sources to transport the wreckage over the rugged terrain to
34                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
the nearest road, so they returned only with photographs, what
parts of the wreckage they could carry, and the bone frag-
ments now placed in the coffins.
     I would later learn that a sixth coffin, larger than the oth-
ers, had remained on the air base. The contents of that coffin
were a mystery to all but a few of those attending the ceremony
and remain so to this day. Like the other coffins, it may have
contained a handful of weathered bone fragments, unidentifiable
by the forensic technology of the 1970s. Or it may have been
empty: a piece of theater diverting attention from a secret still
buried on a remote mountainside.
     I pondered this mystery while sitting in the gloomy archives
of the Indonesian Air Force headquarters in Jakarta, trying to
wrest long-forgotten secrets from the tons of paper stacked hap-
hazardly on the shelves. I was spending what should have been
my golden years in musty libraries, peering at grainy historical
photographs and reading dry operational reports, because of a
chance encounter with a journalist three years previously.
     In June 1986, Indonesia hosted its first international air show.
My good friend Sabam Siagian, at the time the managing editor
of The Jakarta Post, had decided to mark the event with a special
report on Indonesian aviation: past and future. He dispatched
one of his foreign interns to interview me about my experiences
running the Dutch blockade during our struggle for independence.
     The intern, a young, somewhat unkempt Canadian fellow
whose arrival at my house was heralded at some distance by the
thunder of the vintage Harley Davidson motorcycle he used for
transportation, seemed genuinely interested in the history of my
nation's struggle for freedom. I spoke to him at length, telling him
of the immeasurable services that Bob Freeberg had rendered my
nation, when his aircraft had been an essential lifeline connecting
the new Republic of Indonesia with the rest of the region. With
                          THE SIXTH COFFIN                            35
   sub-standard fuel, little technical support, and no charts to speak
   of, Bob and I flew cargo and passengers between Republican air-
   fields and overseas destinations such as Singapore, Bangkok, and
   Manila; all while dodging Dutch fighters enforcing the blockade
   around the Indonesian archipelago.
         At the time of the interview I had held my final position be-
   fore retirement: negotiating public-works contracts for a heavy-
   machinery supplier. After the article was published, I carried a
   copy on my daily rounds to show to clients and colleagues. I was
   appalled to discover that few of my compatriots were aware of
   the essential role that Bob Freeberg had played in building our
   nation. If these well-educated corporate executives and govern-
   ment officials were ignorant of this important component of our
   national struggle, I could assume that the story of Bob Freeberg
   and RI-002 was unknown to the majority of Indonesians.
         Three years later, as a retiree with long days to fill, I decided
   to commit to paper as much about RI-002 as I could remem-
   ber. I began this endeavor with an article about Bob published
   in the 4 July 1989 issue of The Jakarta Post to mark the anniver-
   sary celebration of America's own struggle for freedom. In the
   article, I enumerated Bob's services to the Republic, and told of
   his easy camaraderie with our Indonesian crew and the respect
   and adoration he received (and which greatly embarrassed him)
   from all he met, whether national leader or hotel waiter. In clos-
   ing, I mentioned the discovery of the RI-002 wreckage in 1978
   and expressed my profound regret that there had been no formal
   investigation of the wreckage. Perhaps some clue as to the fate of
   this loyal friend and staunch supporter of the Republic remained
   waiting to be discovered on that remote mountainside.
         To my delight, Matra, a general-interest magazine with a
   wide readership, requested permission to publish an Indonesian-
   language version of the article. In the issue following publication
36                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
there appeared a strongly-worded letter to the editor from Major
R.A. Sulaeman (Retired), taking exception to my assertion that
the aircraft wreckage in Sumatra had not been properly inves-
tigated. Sulaeman claimed that he had led a field investigation
team and had submitted a full report of his findings. He also at-
tached a testimonial that he had received from the Air Force com-
mending his investigative efforts.
      At last, I thought, here was someone with first-hand knowl-
edge of the RI-002 wreckage. I wrote twice to Sulaeman, in
both letters apologizing for my ignorance and hoping that he
would share any information or personal observations. I nev-
er received a reply, though Sulaeman was at the time a mem-
ber of the South Sumatra provincial legislative assembly and,
presumably, reachable by mail.
      I was at a loss to understand why the person who had led
the field investigation of the RI-002 crash (and was so proud
to have received official commendation) seemed so unwill-
ing to discuss the matter. At least, he should have displayed
the common courtesy of replying to a letter of apology from a
fellow retired Air Force officer.
      Seeking answers to the questions raised by my one-sided
correspondence with Sulaeman, I paid a visit to the Air Force
archives in Jakarta. The staff seemed to be only vaguely aware of
the content of the materials in their custody, and were happy to
leave me alone in the stacks to fend for myself.
      The first relevant document I encountered was the official
flight manifest listing the crew and cargo of the last flight of RI-
002. In addition to Bob, the crew consisted of two copilots: Flight
Lieutenant Santoso and Flight Lieutenant Bambang Saptoadji,
along with Flying Officer Soemadi and Sergeant Surjatman. Also
on board had been Samaun Bakri, a senior civilian official.
                          THE SIXTH COFFIN                           37
         Next, I found two decrees ordering the full-honors military
   burial to be conducted at Tanjung Karang Air Base on 29 July
   1978, the anniversary of the first (and only) air raid against Dutch
   military facilities during our struggle for independence. Howev-
   er, there was no mention of whether Bob's remains were to be
   included in this heroes' burial.
         After considerable digging, I managed to find the report of
   the field investigation team led by Sulaeman. The report stated
   that the team departed on 20 April 1978 and arrived late in the
   morning the following day. They could stay only a few hours, as
   impending bad weather forced a return to base. Sulaeman stated
   that the quantity of human remains was not sufficient to allow
   positive identification of the victims, but there was no doubt that
   they had found the wreckage of RI-002.
         I could understand why the crash site had remained undis-
   covered for decades. Sulaeman described the terrain as savage: a
   steeply sloping rock face covered in thick vegetation and a few
   scraggly trees. The wreckage was arrayed over a two-hectare area
   with a vertical rise of two hundred meters. The team could not
   find the cockpit, only remnants of communications equipment.
         They did find a tail wheel, and, a hundred meters away,
   an engine with one of the propellers stuck in the ground. One
   piece of wing still showed some portions of the RI-002 identi-
   fication number, though the letters were badly deformed. Sulae-
   man was surprised to discover another wing section had a white
   star on a black circle with two horizontal white bands with a
   black edge on both sides of the star, similar to the insignia used by
   the United States Air Force. For me, this was the definitive proof
   that the wreckage was of RI-002. Bob had damaged a wing in
   May 1948 and replaced it two months later during an overhaul
   in Manila. He would have acquired the wing from a war-sur-
   plus aircraft being sold for parts. It is highly likely that the new
   coating of paint had been washed away over the years, revealing
   the original military insignia.
38                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
     The most surprising discovery, however, was that the site had
almost certainly been visited by a large team sometime during
the preceding months. Sulaeman noticed spots where the veg-
etation had been cleared away and piled with fragments of the
fuselage. Given the rapid growth rate of vegetation in this tropi-
cal environment, the previous visit must have taken place less
than a year before, otherwise, all traces of land clearing would
have been obscured by new growth.
      Sulaeman made no attempt to analyze his findings. His re-
port was duly endorsed by the base commander, Major Victor
Panggabean, and forwarded to senior command in Jakarta, with
a recommendation that a second expedition be dispatched for
a more thorough investigation. Search as I might, I could find
no trace of the second report, nor any indication that the Air
Force had made any effort to determine the cause of the crash, or
what had happened to the cargo.
      Frustrated in my attempts to wrest information from the Air
Force archives, I turned to civilian information resources. Fortu-
nately, I began this stage of my investigations just when library
research in Indonesia had become easier by an order of magni-
tude. Until the late 1980s, most of the books and academic papers
relating to Indonesian history had been housed in three separate
collections, zealously guarded by their respective institutions. Any
serious research involved numerous applications for permission
from officious bureaucrats, who would grudgingly allow limited
access to specific material. In many cases, an exhausting search
for a particular book or document resulted in the disheartening
discovery that the desired volume was held in a rival collection,
forcing the researcher to repeat the entire laborious process in
another decaying building on the far side of town.
      In 1989, these collections were consolidated into a seven-
storey building adjacent to the downtown campus of the Univer-
                         THE SIXTH COFFIN                            39
   sity of Indonesia. As I stepped through the portals of the imposing
   (and fully air-conditioned) structure, I mustered all of the logical
   problem-solving skills and academic rigor drilled into me by the
   Dutch-colonial educational system. My challenge was to ferret
   out clues concealed among the many millions of words contained
   in the tons of paper and microfilm above my head.
         My first stops on this quest for the truth were the stan-
   dard reference works on the independence struggle. I needed
   to reacquaint myself with the time and place, perhaps jogging
   my memory for long-forgotten facts and events that might sug-
   gest fruitful avenues of inquiry.
         Many of these books featured news photographs from the
   years immediately after the end of the war in the Pacific, when
   we struggled to establish our nation. These were iconic images:
   banners proclaiming our freedom draped over buildings formerly
   owned by our Dutch overlords; nationalist leaders such as Sutan
   Sjahrir negotiating with colonial authorities as intellectual and
   social equals; militiamen, many still in their teens and armed only
   with bamboo poles with razor-sharp tips, ready to defend their
   new-found freedom with their lives.
         One of these images is burned into every Indonesian heart. An
   imposing man in early middle age, impeccably dressed in a white
   tropical suit topped by a peci, a truncated cone derived from the
   Middle-Eastern fez, stands at a microphone set up on an open ter-
   race. In the background is a group of onlookers, also neatly dressed
   in white tropical suits, the formal wear of the day. To his left and a
   few steps behind, a slight, bespectacled man stands with quiet dignity.
         It was 10 AM. on the morning of Friday, 17 August 1945.
   The person at the microphone, Soekarno, reads a hastily com-
   posed message declaring the islands of the former Netherlands
   East Indies to be a sovereign nation. His companion is Muham-
   mad Hatta, the co-signer of the document.
40                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      This announcement was neither delusional posturing nor
meaningless political theater. When the Japanese invaded the
Netherlands East Indies in early 1942, the colonial government
fled into exile in Australia. During the three years of military
occupation, the Japanese authorities had encouraged the con-
tinuation of the nationalist movement, to the point of estab-
lishing armed youth militias, in order to foster grassroots resis-
tance to a future allied invasion.
      That invasion did not happen. The allies captured one air-
base in the far east of the archipelago, then turned northward to
focus on Japan itself. When the Japanese surrendered, instead of
continuing their administration of their formerly occupied terri-
tories, the defeated occupiers sailed home on their ships or retired
into the countryside to await repatriation.
      We were now on our own. Only a relative handful of mili-
tary and civilian officials had escaped to Australia ahead of
the the invading Japanese. The government-in-exile did not
have the resources to return and reinstate the colonial govern-
ment. And the Netherlands itself, still recovering from the bru-
tal Nazi occupation, was unable to send troops or function-
aries halfway around the world.
      Only the nationalist organizations had the capability to pre-
vent the archipelago from descending into anarchy. During the
previous weeks, the Japanese military authorities had sponsored
several conferences in which nationalist leaders had discussed
and agreed upon the philosophical and political foundations of
an independent state of Indonesia. The day following the proc-
lamation of independence, the nationalist congress elected Soek-
arno and Hatta as, respectively, president and vice-president of
the new-born Republic of Indonesia.
      They had struggled long and hard for this moment. Soekarno
and Hatta had been educated in Dutch schools for the native elite,
                          THE SIXTH COFFIN                           41
   with Hatta taking his university studies in the Netherlands itself.
   While in their twenties both had joined other Dutch-educated
   future-Indonesians in promoting nationalist ideas. They had risen
   rapidly to the leadership of the movement: Hatta for sheer intel-
   lectual brilliance, Soekarno for his charisma and oratorical talent.
         Their growing prominence in the nationalist movement
   did not escape the notice of the colonial authorities. Soekarno
   and Hatta spent years in prison or banished to remote regions.
   They were both released by the Japanese, and were encouraged
   to re-assume their leadership of the nationalist movement. Un-
   der the Japanese occupation, they skillfully played their mili-
   tary overlords, collaborating when in the best interests of their
   fellow Indonesians while subtly undermining the Japanese to
   minimize the worst oppression.
         While Hatta is immensely respected for his intellect and po-
   litical skills, Indonesians revere and adore Soekarno. This mag-
   nificent orator convinced an entire nation, brow-beaten for cen-
   turies by European colonialists, that they could be the masters of
   their own homeland. For the next five years, the nascent nation
   struggled to keep the Dutch from reinstating their colonial empire.
   Dressed in rags, living on rice and soybean cake, and confront-
   ing tanks and machine guns with antique handguns or sharpened
   bamboo spears, the people of Indonesia, myself included, looked
   to Soekarno for hope and inspiration until that long-awaited day
   when the Netherlands would formally cede control of the islands
   of the East Indies to their former colonial subjects.
         Reading those books evoked memories of those halcyon
   days as a youthful revolutionary. Inspired and invigorated, I pe-
   rused the library with diligence for several weeks, cheerfully and
   ably assisted by the staff. But all the ability and dedication in the
   world will not find something that does not exist. I encountered
   only a few passing mentions of Bob Freeberg and RI-002 in the
42                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
official histories and memoirs of the period. Nor did I find much
during my extensive search of the microfilmed newspaper archive.
During the years of struggle, scores of publications, ranging from
glorified pamphlets to full broadsheets, had been founded in both
Dutch- and Republican-controlled regions. Some thrive to this
day. I found many fascinating articles, but little information rele-
vant to the mystery of RI-002. With limited resources, these feisty
publications focused on their primary mission: to raise morale
and mobilize resources in their respective communities by dis-
seminating information relating to local concerns. This left little
room for such matters as international blockade running.
      I did find several mentions of Bob Freeberg and RI-002
in the Batavia Dutch-language press. As I expected, the opin-
ions were uniformly negative, using defamatory language and
rife with lurid speculation. Those articles sparked memories of
conversations with other foreigners in Jogjakarta, who roundly
condemned the libelous assertions of the colonial press. Some of
this outrage made its way into print. Books written by foreigners
who had observed or assisted us in our long struggle for freedom
all portrayed Bob as the fearless, skilled, and noble aviator I so
fondly remembered. One British author, a former diplomat who
had coached our leaders in the arcane intricacies of international
relations, praised Bob as “America's Best Ambassador”.
      Good pilots, quite correctly, become nervous when their in-
strument readings conflict with their visual observations. Though
long out of the cockpit, the paucity of hard information, cryptic
indications of a deliberate cover-up, and wildly divergent opin-
ions of witnesses, invoked in me the same visceral unease as when
I suspected that an instrument on my control panel might not be
indicating the true situation. The only way I could relieve this
sense of unease would be to investigate, and perhaps solve, the
mystery of Bob Freeberg and RI-002.
                         THE SIXTH COFFIN                            43
        4
        BIRTH OF
        RI-002
        —
        JO G JAKA RTA — C I K ALON G — TASI K MA L AYA
        May – June 1947
   After the CALI flight with Bob, Suryadarma ordered me back to
   Jogjakarta and my desk. The Air Force was growing rapidly, with
   air bases being set up throughout Republican-held areas. Sury-
   adarma was counting on me and a handful of other officers with
   advanced educations to handle administration of his increasingly
   unwieldy organization. For now, I could only stare at the stack of
   papers on my desk and dream of open skies.
        In fact, this is how I had spent much of my childhood. In
   1924, when I was five years of age, I saw an airplane for the first
   time. I was traveling home with my parents from Surabaya to
   the nearby town of Lamongan when we drove past the airfield
   at Gresik, some twenty kilometers to the north. Though the facil-
   ity was seldom used, on that day a full squadron of military air-
   craft were parked on the airfield. We stopped near the fence and
   gawked at the flying machines.
        I could not remember even seeing pictures of such odd-
   looking monsters before that day. I must have been star-
   ing at this amazing sight for some time, because I was pulled
   away by my father and ordered to return to the automobile so
   we could continue our trip home.
44                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
     All afternoon and evening I kept wondering how those mon-
sters could fly. The next morning I had my answer. A steadily in-
creasing roar filling the sky sent us rushing from the house. We
looked up to see the aircraft that had been parked at Gresik the
previous day now flying in formation. It was a breathtaking spec-
tacle. All eyes were glued on the planes until the entire formation
disappeared behind the trees and the deafening roar faded away.
From that day onward, I wanted nothing more than to fly.
      The passing years only increased my passion for flight. On
the rare occasions when I heard the drone of an approaching air-
craft, I would rush out of my home, or even my classroom, for
a look. By my late teens I had gained the physical and mental
maturity required of a pilot. Had I been a European, my excel-
lent eyesight, physical fitness, and academic achievement certainly
would have won me entry into an aviation academy. But in the
Netherlands East Indies, Indonesians could only stare in wonder
at airplanes. The only Indonesian I knew who managed to enter
the Dutch military flight academy was a champion tennis player
who had coached the Governor-General's daughter. He had only
a handful of compatriot classmates, including Augustinus Adis-
ucipto, Abdurrahman Saleh, and Halim Perdanakusuma. Every
other pilot would be trained from scratch after the war. But, as
fervently as I wished, I would not be among them. Suryadarma
remained deaf to my entreaties to be admitted into flight school.
But if words would not convince him that I had the ability to be-
come an aviator, actions might.
      One morning I took a break from my desk to watch the
evaluation of new recruits. Cadets were accepted for flight train-
ing only if they could demonstrate the basic skills necessary
for controlling an aircraft. For this purpose we had fashioned
a makeshift glider with rudimentary controls. We called this
glider the Zogling, derived from the Dutch word for fledgling,
                           BIRTH OF RI–002                          45
   a name appropriate not only for the hopeful future air aces but
   the Air Force itself. The Zogling was towed across a grass field
   by a cable winched in by a powerful Harley-Davidson motor-
   cycle engine. No one was injured attempting to fly the Zogling,
   but the flights were often a humorous display of nose dives, tail
   dragging, and even the glider being hauled ignominiously along
   the entire length of the field.
         After the training session, I pulled rank on the flight instruc-
   tor and commandeered the Zogling. Like a successful trainee, I
   demonstrated the ability to nose the craft up to the height of a
   man, keep the wings level while flying the length of the field, and
   to plop down squarely on the landing skid. I had hoped that this
   demonstration of basic skills would be enough to change Sury-
   adarma's mind and authorize me for flight training. However,
   all I received was a reprimand, and the certainty that I would
   continue to pilot only my desk.
         One beautiful morning in early June 1947, my desk-bound
   routine was broken when I received a message from the Republi-
   can Army Siliwangi Division base in Tasikmalaya, a town in the
   highlands of southwest Java, that a large aircraft had landed on
   a remote beach to their south. That was a remarkable enough
   occurrence, but I was astounded when told that the foreign oc-
   cupant had asked for me by name.
         I reported this news to Suryadarma, who agreed that this was
   worth an official investigation. Suryadarma ordered me to fly to Ta-
   sikmalaya and liaise with Army command there. Considering the
   urgency of the mission, Suryadarma instructed me to take the fastest
   aircraft in our motley fleet, a Nishikoren monoplane, for the journey.
         I would also have one our best pilots. Soenario, or Betet,
   as we called him, was one of the remarkable success stories of
   our fledgling air force. A year earlier, he had been a village boy
46                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
who had barely seen an airplane. Now, after only rudimentary
instruction on decrepit Japanese wrecks, he was at the controls of
a nimble, powerful military aircraft. But I had every confidence in
Betet, which was good, as only he was wearing a parachute.
      In Tasikmalaya I reported to the base commander, who as-
signed Lieutenant Pang Soeparto as my liaison counterpart. The
foreigner had since returned to his aircraft, so Pang and I hopped
into a jeep for the drive to the beach. We arrived shortly before dusk
to see a Dakota, still in camouflage colors and with no markings
at all, parked on the sand halfway between the water and a line of
palm trees. It was not a bit damaged, indicating that this emergency
landing on a narrow strip of sandy beach had been a masterpiece.
      During the journey, I had assumed that this had been an un-
announced blockade run gone wrong, and wondered who might
be the pilot. As the former contact person for the CALI blockade
runs, many pilots would know my name and would consider me
as the obvious person to ask for assistance in an emergency such
as this. However, I knew that landing on an unprepared beach in
fading light would require piloting skills of a high order, and that
being in such a situation in the first place indicated an adventur-
ous pilot. Therefore, as we drove up to the Dakota I was not the
least surprised to see Bob Freeberg, unshaven, unwashed, with the
bright expression of cheerful optimism that I would remember,
fondly, long after Bob himself was gone.
      It was Bob's typical good fortune that the sand at the time of
landing, shortly after nightfall, had been moist and compact. But
now, after two days of hot sun, the sand was dry and loose and
the wheels had sunk twenty centimeters.
     “Two days ago I kept rolling and rolling when I land-
ed,” Bob said. “But now the plane doesn't budge an inch,
even when I apply full power.”
                            BIRTH OF RI–002                            47
         Bob introduced me to the two flight mechanics, whose love
   of adventure had overcome their quite-justified annoyance at be-
   ing, basically, shanghaied. They were enjoying this mystery trip to
   an unknown destination, proudly explaining that the beach land-
   ing had been beautifully done and they were happy to be alive.
        “The skipper is a good pilot,” one of them volunteered.
        While Bob busied himself with his Dakota, the mechanics
   told me how they had come to be on this remote beach. Three
   days previously in Manila, Bob had offered them a token fee for
   what he had claimed to be a test flight. If the mechanics won-
   dered why this test flight took off before dawn, they did not ask
   questions. But they were certainly surprised when the aircraft,
   once airborne, headed directly south toward Borneo, landing
   four hours later at Labuan to refuel. They knew they had been
   fooled, but their love of adventure won out, and they put their
   trust in this young American pilot.
        They would soon discover how much adventure this flight
   had in store. Bob was navigating from a chart with a scale of one
   to ten million. The entire island of Java, stretching over a thou-
   sand kilometers from Sumatra to Bali, was only a ten-centimeter-
   long smudge on his map. Five hours out of Labuan, Bob spotted
   an island that he identified as Bawean, which on his chart is rep-
   resented by a small dot in the Java Sea to the east of Madura. I
   believe that, in fact, he had flown over an island in the Karimun
   group some three hundred kilometers to the west. Bob continued
   southward, following what the chart indicated would be the cor-
   rect bearing from Bawean to Jogjakarta – until he reached the
   south coast of Java, with a large town nowhere in sight.
        Thinking he was still far to the east of his actual position,
   Bob headed westward, searching for familiar landmarks until he
   spotted a railway line. He explained to the mechanics that on his
   previous flight to Java he had navigated by following this rail-
48                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
way line. Thinking that he was much further east than he was, he
had every reason to believe that following this line west would
take him directly to Jogjakarta.
      Bob was therefore dumbfounded and not a little concerned
when it terminated in Purworejo. He flew north to south over moun-
tainous territory until the light of the gibbous moon illuminated the
terrain. By nine p.m., his fuel was almost finished. Bob suggested
that he might ditch the aircraft and swim to shore with the help of
life vests stored in the cabin. But the stricken look on the faces of his
companions suggested that this would not be a viable option.
      At last, Bob spotted a stretch of beach gleaming in the moon-
light. With only a few liters of fuel left in the tanks, he set the
Dakota down without a scratch.
      The beach seemed deserted. Bob and the mechanics per-
formed their post-flight checklist and prepared to sleep on the
hard benches in the cabin. After several minutes, Bob saw flickers
of orange light through the cabin windows. He rose and cracked
open the rear cargo door. Indistinct figures, some holding flick-
ering bamboo torches, were visible among the palms lining the
beach about fifty meters from the Dakota.
      Several of the figures approached, stopping twenty meters
from the aircraft. One of them, a robust middle-aged man who
they later learned was the village headman, spoke a few words
in an unfamiliar language. Bob turned to the mechanics in hopes
of a translation. They only shrugged. Bob spoke in English, and
one of mechanics repeated the phrase in Tagalog. Bob and the
headman regarded each other in mutual incomprehension for
a few moments. The villagers spoke a few words to each oth-
er, then turned and walked back toward the line of palms. Bob
shrugged, and closed the rear door.
      Two hours later, the chattering of voices and the flick-
ers of torchlight through the windows awakened the crew.
                            BIRTH OF RI–002                               49
   Bob again opened the door to see the headman and his com-
   panions now standing only a few meters from the door. The
   headman handed his torch to a companion and made the
   universal signs of hospitality: bringing his bunched fingers to
   his mouth to indicate eating; tilting his head and laying his
   cheek on an open palm for sleep.
         Bob turned to the mechanics, who knew better than to re-
   fuse an offer of hospitality when alone and defenseless in foreign
   territory. They gathered their gear, hopped onto the sand and
   slid the door closed. Bob motioned that no one was to touch the
   Dakota, and the headman nodded. They followed the villagers to
   the tidy cluster of raised wood-and-bamboo houses they called
   Cikalong. There, the crew were given a sparse but satisfying meal
   of rice and grilled fish, then invited to sleep on straw mats laid on
   the wooden floor of the headmans house.
         The following morning Bob and his crew rose at dawn to
   make a visual inspection of the Dakota. The aircraft had no vis-
   ible damage. Bob fired up the engines and attempted to roll the
   aircraft along the sand. The heavy Dakota would not budge, the
   wheels trapped in the soft sand.
         A few villagers squatted at the treeline, enthralled that the
   aircraft had roared mightily, visibly straining, but could not free
   itself from the sand. The headman indicated that Bob should
   return with him to the village.
         At the village, Bob was met by a squad of armed soldiers, one
   of whom spoke halting English. He informed Bob that he would
   need permission from the army command in the region to take
   off again. The soldier also noted that some of villagers thought he
   and his crew were Dutch spies and wanted to shoot them.
         In late afternoon, Bob climbed into the army truck and em-
   barked on a harrowing 60-kilometer ride over the coastal limestone
50                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
hills to the army base at Tasikmalaya. The six-hour trip over the
narrow road with bad hairpin turns and sheer drops on either side
kept Bob anxious the whole way. He finally arrived after midnight.
      In Tasikmalaya Bob was able to explain his situation more
fully, including giving the officers the name of his one contact in
the Republic: Captain Petit Muharto.
      Pang and I now had to decide what to do about the Dakota.
Though this village was staunchly Republican, many residents
of this region remained sympathetic to the Dutch. Chances grew
with each passing hour that the news of Bob's landing would
reach Dutch-controlled Batavia and prompt the dispatch of an air
patrol. Time was not on our side.
      Bob had not yet grasped the seriousness of the situation. He
suggested we contact a Singaporean firm to ship perforated steel
plates by landing craft to the beach. I had to remind him that the
Dutch naval blockade would make this impossible.
      More than a hundred villagers were standing around the
plane, some of them running their hands along the fuselage, un-
able to believe that such a colossus could fly. By this point almost
every Indonesian, even those living in remote areas, had seen an
airplane in the sky; but few had seen an aircraft up close. In this
hard-scrabble seaside village, the landing of Bob’s Dakota was a
welcome diversion. Life was hard even in the best of times in this
remote corner of Java. The villagers eked out a living through
fishing, rice cultivation on the narrow strip between the coast and
the Parahyangan range, and for the “lucky” few, penurious wages
working on nearby rubber plantations.
      So, as usual in those times when even the most basic ne-
cessities were often unavailable, we improvised a solution using
whatever was on hand. We first attempted to make a runway of
woven coconut leaves. This failed as the strips could not take
                           BIRTH OF RI–002                           51
   the weight of the Dakota. By this time, hundreds more villagers,
   some from tens of kilometers away, had descended on the vil-
   lage. This crowd gave me an idea.
        As is typical in Java, the houses in this village were construct-
   ed of woven bamboo matting attached to wooden support poles
   and beams. Bamboo is strong as well as pliable: a mat could easily
   support the heavy Dakota. Pang called together the heads of each
   nearby village. Using both our authority as military officers and
   appeals to the villagers desire for independence from their despised
   Dutch overlords, we convinced the leaders to mobilize the residents
   of their respective villages to weave a total of five hundred bamboo
   mats, in size and shape similar to the walls of their houses.
         The villagers would need three days to complete the 500 mats.
   Since it was Bob’s intention to seek charter contracts with the
   Republicans, I decided we could best use this time to make such
   arrangements. Bob and I returned with Pang to his army base in
   Tasikmalaya. From there we boarded the Nishikoren for the thirty
   minute flight back to Jogjakarta to meet with Suryadarma.
         The briefing with Suryadarma took less than thirty minutes.
   The Air Force commander explained that the Republic had a stock
   of quinine stored in Tasikmalaya. The anti-malaria drug would
   fetch a high price on the international market, but the Dutch had
   forbidden direct commercial transactions with the Republic. Sury-
   adarma wanted Bob to sneak the quinine out from under the noses
   of the Dutch and fly it to Manila to be sold, along with some high-
   value vanilla beans stored in Jogjakarta. Bob agreed without hesita-
   tion, and we returned to Tasikmalaya with the Nishikoren.
        We again wedged ourselves into the open rear cockpit, Bob
   plumping his large frame onto the deck of the aircraft lying flush
   on the bulkhead, me squatting between his feet, face-to-face. To
   take my mind off the discomfort during this thirty-minute flight, I
   studied the features of this remarkable foreigner, a cheerful, open
52                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
face highlighted by sky-blue eyes. The eyes, somehow, were both
piercing and kind, the eyes of a strict but fair military man who
would forgive you any mistake—if you made it only once.
      Bob did not speak during the entire flight, as any conversa-
tion could scarcely be heard over the roar of the powerful engine
and the wind whipping past our ears. But I regarded Bob's reti-
cence as fitting for a person of such extraordinary skill and confi-
dence. Here was a man who had flown his aircraft single-handed
on a fifteen-hour flight to a destination in a foreign country he
had visited only once before, by a very different route, all the
while guided by a chart that showed critical navigational land-
marks as mere specks in the ocean. Nevertheless, he could land
on an unprepared beach and take off again from an improvised
runway, all without much fuss. At the time, I wondered whether
he was extraordinarily skilled, incredibly lucky, or just an incur-
able optimist. In the following months, I would come to realize
that he was all three, and more besides.
      Crammed into the open cockpit of what was currently the
most advanced aircraft in our armada, I saw clearly how the
Dakota, and Freeberg himself, could serve our revolution. Here
was an opportunity to do things off the beaten track—new ways
to outsmart the enemy. I was certain that the arrival of this
brave young pilot, literally dropping from the skies, might be a
turning point in our revolution.
      The next morning, we again made the nerve-wracking drive
across the stark limestone hills to the beach at Cikalong, this time
carrying two drums of aviation fuel. We now had to wait two more
days, each moment dreading that we might hear the faint drone of
a Dutch patrol aircraft approaching the beach. To pass the time, I
visited the houses where the mats were being hand-woven.
      The four-square-meter mats, fashioned from five-centimeter-
wide bamboo strips, represented prodigious (and wholly volun-
                          BIRTH OF RI–002                            53
   RI - 0 0 2 t a kes o f f f rom
   t he b ea ch a t Cilo t o k in
   S o ut hwest Ja va .
54                                ONE MAN AIR FORCE
tary) effort by these impoverished villagers. Many would work at
night, then depart for another back-breaking day in the rice fields
or in fishing boats. I hoped they had not lost sleep for no reason.
      On the morning of 8 June 1947, the 500 mats were fin-
ished. I ordered them laid in two 450-meter parallel strips the
width of the landing gear. As the mats were being put in posi-
tion, Bob and I had the first of many disagreements which would
mark the time of our professional collaboration. I felt the mats
should overlap in the direction of travel, while Bob insisted on
the opposite. I forget which of us prevailed on that occasion, but
I do remember a spirited argument.
     The Dakota would take off with thirty minutes total
fuel, the 92-octane fuel I brought from Tasikmalaya mixed
with the traces of 100-octane fuel remaining in the tanks. We
scraped the sand from around the main landing wheels. Bob
revved the engines to full power. Pang, myself, and scores of
villagers strained at the tires until, with a lurch, the Dakota
rolled onto the first mat of our improvised runway. Pang and
I then thanked the villagers for their assistance and joined Bob
and the two mechanics on board.
     “Now, watch the air speed,” Bob told one of the mechanics,
who was sitting in the right-hand seat. “As soon as we reach sixty,
get the flaps down full, okay?”
      Off we went. I felt a sudden heave as the flaps went down
and we were airborne. We made a wide, shallow, climbing turn
over the Indian Ocean, then passed over the landing site to see
that the matting was scattered all over the sand by the propeller
backwash. With Pang navigating, we headed inland, landing in
Tasikmalaya thirty minutes later with no fuel to spare.
      In Tasikmalaya, the mechanics refueled the aircraft while
soldiers loaded our primary cargo of quinine sulfate, well over
a metric ton. From there, we flew to Jogjakarta to load a metric
ton of vanilla, the most expensive spice in the world after saffron.
                          BIRTH OF RI–002                            55
        We met with Suryadarma the following morning, and he in-
   structed me to accompany the flight to Manila as mission leader.
   Pang would accompany us to represent the Republican Army’s Sili-
   wangi Division, the owner of the cargo. Suryadarma also assigned
   a young airman, Sub-Lieutenant Boediardjo, as the radio operator.
   Boediardjo was, like me, a beneficiary of the Dutch program to
   educate the native elite. He spoke Dutch and English and had been
   trained in radio maintenance and other useful technical skills.
        There was one more important issue to consider. The quinine
   cargo was potentially a matter for dispute. The raw material had
   been harvested from a Dutch-owned plantation and processed in
   a Dutch factory shortly before the war. The Republic of Indonesia
   took the position that the Dutch had abandoned all claim to the
   property when the government fled to Australia during the Japa-
   nese invasion. As the current sovereign government, the Republic
   therefore claimed the quinine as its own.
         On the other hand, Bob’s unregistered, war-surplus Dako-
   ta was effectively illegal in the world of international aviation,
   like an automobile without license plates. Such an aircraft flying
   from an unknown nation carrying a disputed cargo and undoc-
   umented passengers would certainly encounter difficulties with
   customs and immigration officials.
         Suryadarma insisted that the Dakota carry some sort of
   identification as belonging to the Republic of Indonesia. Under
   international aviation regulations, the Republic was included in
   the air territory of the Netherlands East Indies. Aircraft domiciled
   in the territory were issued a registration consisting of PK (one of
   the prefixes assigned to the Netherlands by international aviation
   agreements) followed by three digits. Since simply making up a
   PK registration number would also be illegal (like an automobile
   owner fashioning his own license plates) we decided to create our
   own registration system and hope for the best.
56                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      I suggested that the designation bear the initials RI, for Re-
public of Indonesia, followed by three digits. Suryadarma gave his
approval, and I proposed the call sign RI-002. At first Bob did not
agree, claiming RI-001 for his plane, since his was the first civil-
ian aircraft of the Republic. But he conceded the point when told
that RI-001 was reserved for the future presidential airplane. So,
on 9 June 1947, this war-battered Dakota was christened RI-002.
     The RI-002 marking was painted on the tail while we spent
the rest of the day resting and preparing for the journey. Two
hours after midnight on 10 June 1947 we set off for Manila.
When we landed at Labuan six hours later to refuel, no one com-
mented on the RI-002 markings. As in centuries past, this strate-
gic port on an island off the northwest coast of Borneo, astride
the busy mercantile routes of the South China Sea, was indifferent
to nations and politics, caring only that the ships that docked
(and now the aircraft that landed) had money to spend or goods
to trade. An hour later, with full tanks and great anticipation, we
began the final segment of our journey.
      During the uneventful final leg to Manila, Boedi, Pang, and I
discussed our situation and tried to plan our next move. We had no
idea of the kind of welcome we could expect in the Philippines, con-
sidering that my compatriots and I carried only minimal personal
documentation (the Republic of Indonesia had yet to issue its first
passport) and our aircraft was identified only by a made-up registra-
tion number from an unrecognized nation. Boedi, try as he might,
could not get the radio working so we could not even announce
our imminent arrival. Discouraged, we all looked to the cockpit,
where Bob, calm and composed, showing no sign of fatigue, was on
his ninth hour at the controls. We turned to look at each other, our
faces seeming to say: Lets just do it, come what may!
     As we approached Manila, Bob asked me to sit in the copilot
seat to operate the flaps. Neither of the two mechanics were qual-
                          BIRTH OF RI–002                             57
   ified as copilots, so they could not take the seat for fear of sanc-
   tions should aviation authorities discover that they had operated
   controls while in Philippine air space. I had joined the Indonesian
   Air Force to fly, and now I finally found myself sitting in front of
   the controls of an aircraft in flight.
         I was quite nervous. As we could not inform air-traffic control
   of our presence, Bob put the flaps into the one-quarter position and
   made a pass over the airport: a clear indication that we intended to
   land. The green flag went up. As we turned for the downwind leg,
   Bob asked me to set half flaps. I knew how to do it, but maybe be-
   cause I was nervous I overshot the neutral position. The plane sank
   frighteningly (or so it seemed to me). Without a word Bob added
   power and put the flaps in the half position. He only smiled and
   said, calmly: “Be careful not to pass the neutral position.”
         I apologized, and did not repeat my mistake when ordered
   to put three-quarter and then full flaps on the final approach. Af-
   ter landing, we were asked to report immediately to Department
   of Civil Aviation officials. I had assumed they would ask about
   the unfamiliar registration, and so had prepared a speech assert-
   ing the legitimacy of the Republic of Indonesia and what we con-
   sidered to be our legal right to administer our own airspace.
         Instead, however, an official asked Bob to identify his copilot.
   This was evidently a requirement for a Dakota on an internation-
   al flight. Bob looked around helplessly until I stepped forward
   and said: “I am the copilot!” After all, I had been sitting in the
   right-hand seat when we landed.
        “Please show me your license,” the official said.
         I hesitated and then took out my Air Force identification
   card. In Indonesian, it read: Muharto: Opsir Udara III. During
   this period, the English translation of my rank would have been
   Flight Lieutenant. This rank does not necessarily indicate that I
   could actually fly an airplane. On the reasonable assumption that
58                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
none of the Filipinos were familiar with Indonesian military rank
designations, I gave myself a demotion of one grade and stated
my rank as Pilot Officer. That satisfied them, and from then on, at
least in Filipino eyes, I was officially a pilot. Nevertheless, thanks
to the Dutch, it would be months before I would fly again.
                           BIRTH OF RI–002                             59
         5
         INSTITUTIONAL
         AMNESIA
         —
         JAKARTA
         February – October 1991
   During my various careers I have attempted to instill a respect
   for the written word in my students, subordinates, and colleagues.
   Nevertheless, I am forced to recognize that most of my efforts
   have been in vain. Indonesia has an oral culture; we see little value
   in keeping authoritative written records, save for land registries
   and other practical matters. If we wish to learn about an event in
   recent history, we will simply ask someone who was there.
         Only a decade had passed since the discovery of the RI-002
   wreckage: I was certain that the officers commanding the various
   military units involved in the investigation should still have clear
   memories of this important and relatively recent event. My first
   call was to Air Marshall Ashadi Tjahjadi, who had been chief of
   staff of the Air Force when the crash site was discovered. I knew
   Ashadi personally, so he took my call and seemed quite forthcom-
   ing. Nevertheless, he had little information to offer.
        Ashadi explained that that he had too often been away from
   Air Force headquarters, escorting General M. Jusuf, then joint
   military chief of staff, on inspection tours. I knew this to be a
   reasonable excuse. Jusuf had been a dedicated commander who
60                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
kept close watch on activities at all levels of the military services.
He expected relevant staff officers to be at his side during field
inspections, not commanding a desk in Jakarta.
      Ashadi had instructed his aide, Colonel A.R. Alamsyah, to
handle all the details of the investigation. But Alamsyah's demise
a few years before had blocked this important avenue of investi-
gation. Still, it is strange that Ashadi himself could not remember
what had happened to Bob's remains, since he, in fact, had signed
the order for the military funeral.
      Nor could Victor Panggabean. Though he had dispatched
the investigative expedition led by Sulaeman, Panggabean claimed
that he could not remember what was done with the remains.
When I contacted him by telephone, he told me: “It was so long
ago and I cannot remember anything about it now.”
      As for Sulaeman, who might have provided much valuable
information, I never heard a word, despite two attempts at com-
munication. This mute stance of Sulaeman and Panggabean's fail-
ing memory seemed strange, even suspect. I have no idea whether
there had been some sort of understanding between Ashadi, Pang-
gabean, and Sulaeman to consign RI-002 to the dustbin of history.
Or whether it was just a case of former military officers averse
to risking their comfortable retirement or prestige by revisiting
a past mystery, unearthing metaphorical skeletons that had been
laid to eternal rest along with the remains of the RI-002 crew.
      I then attempted to track down military commanders who
had served in South Sumatra at the time of the crash. During
the revolution even senior officers had been astonishingly young.
Four decades later there should be at least one freedom fighter
with clear memories of that time.
      I was correct. In 1991 I met H. Nurdin Pandji, who had been
a Major in the Republican army. In late 1948 he had been com-
mander of the Lampung Northern Front, and commander of the
                         INSTITUTIONAL AMNESIA                         61
   Mobile Battalion of the North Lampung Sub-territory, headquar-
   tered in Kotabumi. He remembered most details of this eventful
   period and strongly denied knowledge of an airplane crash in his
   territory. As the highest authority in the region, Nurdin assured
   me, he would have been informed of any such incident.
         Referring to the disturbed earth near the wreckage, I asked
   if a Dutch patrol could have found RI-002 as they advanced into
   Republican territories after the second Dutch aggression in De-
   cember 1948. Nurdin explained that the Dutch military forces
   started their advance to Kotabumi from Tanjung Karang in the
   south on 1 January 1949 and occupied Kotabumi on 24 May
   1949. He had by then already moved his headquarters to Kasui,
   west of Kotabumi, the area he held and defended against enemy
   penetrations until the end of hostilities.
         On the date that the cease-fire became effective in August
   1949, he met his Dutch counterpart, Captain Klapper, who con-
   firmed that the Dutch troops were dispatched from Tanjung
   Karang and did not come from the north, so they did not pass
   through the Mount Punggur area. Nurdin also asserted that no
   skirmishes between Republican and Dutch troops ever occurred
   in the area under his command. Thanks to Nurdin's clear recol-
   lections, I could be certain that the RI-002 wreckage had not been
   found by the Dutch. Whoever had disturbed the wreckage had
   done so many years (most likely decades) after the event.
         Having learned little of value from sources in the military,
   I then turned my attention to the surviving relatives of RI-002
   crew members, in the hope that they might have information not
   recorded in the official records.
         I first found Fuad Bakri, the son of Samaun Bakri, the Repub-
   lican senior official who was responsible for the gold cargo. Fuad
   had been present at the military burial of his father and the other
   Indonesian victims in July 1978. The night before the ceremony,
62                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
Sulaeman, in his capacity as investigation-team leader, briefed the
families. He instructed them not to be concerned about the gold
bullion, as “it would distract from the solemnity of the occasion”.
      Fuad had been offended by this junior officer's patroniz-
ing attitude toward the families of national heroes. He chastised
Sulaeman, asserting that the families were not interested in the
gold, but only wanted to know all of the truth so they could put
the matter to rest after thirty years.
      Fuad showed me a clipping from Bandung newspaper Piki-
ran Rakyat dated 7 August 1978, reporting on the burial cer-
emony and containing a summary of Sulaeman's briefing. Two
points caught my attention. Sulaeman noted that “among the hu-
man remains found was a long tooth which seemed to belong to
the American captain”. It is unlikely that Sulaeman's audience
took that seriously. Nobody would ever believe that the teeth of
a Westerner are longer than those of Asians. Sulaeman was nei-
ther an anatomist nor a dentist. He might have been joking or he
perhaps thought his audience was gullible enough to believe this.
      Sulaeman also referred to a 7.62 mm caliber bullet lodged
in a generator, one of the pieces of wreckage lying on the surface
and brought back by the two farmers who first discovered the
crash site. Sulaeman suggested this as proof that RI-002 had been
fired upon in the air, though as an intelligence officer he should
have known that the anti-aircraft guns from the period all used
bullets of at least 12 mm caliber.
      In admonishing the families to ignore rumors that the RI-
002 had carried a quantity of gold bullion, Sulaeman explained
that the Air Force had already formed a special team to investi-
gate. This also seemed to be an item of disinformation. My thor-
ough search of Air Force archives had found no trace of a report
on the second visit to the site. I know that this second investiga-
tion had lasted for several days, as there had been sufficient time
                       INSTITUTIONAL AMNESIA                        63
   to dig up the buried cockpit. As a former Air Force administra-
   tive officer, accustomed to the meticulous documentation of any
   and all official activities, I found this absence of written evidence
   puzzling, and wondered if this was evidence of lax documenta-
   tion, or something more sinister.
         The newspaper articles Fuad Bakri showed me suggested a
   new avenue of inquiry. There is no doubt that RI-002 had been
   carrying the reported quantity of gold bullion when it lifted off
   from Branti air strip en route to Bengkulu. The definitive proof
   of this assertion was an item in the authoritative national dai-
   ly Kompas, reporting that a band of wild rattan harvesters had
   stumbled upon the wreckage in May 1983. As an illustration of
   how the story of RI-002 repeatedly vanishes from the public con-
   sciousness, the newspaper claimed that the wreckage was “not
   previously known”. Only after three days did the newspaper issue
   a correction and identify the wreckage as the remains of RI-002.
   Unlike the brief mentions of the wreckage discovery and full-hon-
   ors burial of the crew in 1978, the 1983 rediscovery was widely
   reported and generated considerable public reaction.
         Several readers contributed additional information through
   letters to the editor. One correspondent, Slamet Adi Hadmodjo,
   identified himself as supervisor for Dutch gold mines in western
   Java that had been taken over by the Republic. He remembered
   that in July 1947 there had been ten twenty-five kilogram cases of
   gold stored in his office in Sukabumi waiting to be transported by
   truck to Jogjakarta. The first Dutch aggression at the end of that
   month had sealed off all land routes into the Republican capital,
   necessitating a “Plan B”. Slamet was instructed to transport the
   gold to the town of Serang in Banten, a Republican region located
   at the northwest corner of Java.
         An article from a 1983 issue of the Jakarta magazine Sari-
   nah picks up the story. Army Captain Abdurrahman, who in
64                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
1948 had worked for the Air Force in Serang as a civilian truck
driver, vividly recounted personal memories of the night he
helped load cargo onto RI-002:
     “After the briefing that night, five cases were transported
from the residency office to Air Force headquarters. Each case
had to be carried by two men. By midnight, the cases were moved
again to the RI-002 Dakota. I also helped carry them, and the cas-
es were transported by a 1937 Chevrolet truck. I was the driver.
One case was already opened and by God, as long as I have lived,
I have never seen so much gold.”
      The disappearance of the gold had been the subject of
numerous conversations in Air Force canteens during the
weeks following the disappearance. Our theories coalesced
around three possible scenarios.
      The first scenario was inspired by a brief report in ANETA,
the Netherlands East Indies news service. The report, which was
retracted the following day, stated that RI-002 had been intercepted
by “six Dutch fighters” and forced to land in Palembang, a town in
a Dutch-controlled region of Sumatra. The single source of this item,
I discovered, had been an unconfirmed report received by the Re-
public of Indonesia representative office in Singapore. A news item
some days later mentioned that the American consulate in Batavia
had dispatched an officer to Palembang, who had found no wit-
nesses or other evidence to confirm the story. The colonial govern-
ment used the American report to buttress their claim that they had
no knowledge of, or involvement in, the disappearance of RI-002.
      This lack of physical evidence, along with the discovery of
the wreckage on Mount Punggur three decades later, allowed me
to dismiss this scenario completely. As a former military officer
familiar with Dutch administration procedures, I knew that an
operation involving a half-dozen fighters would have generated
a paper trail along the entire chain of command, making such
an event impossible to conceal.
                       INSTITUTIONAL AMNESIA                          65
         Quite the contrary, the Netherlands East Indies government
   certainly would have publicized what they would have consid-
   ered the rightful interception of an airplane that had repeatedly
   violated their airspace. The world's newspapers might well have
   run a dramatic photograph of the “notorious Bob Freeberg” in
   handcuffs. The Dutch would have asserted that Bob had been
   piloting an aircraft filled with “gold looted from a Dutch mine”,
   supporting the Dutch contention that the blockade runners (and,
   by implication, the Republican leaders who hired them) were
   no more than common criminals.
         The second scenario, gleefully endorsed by Batavia newspa-
   pers, postulated that Bob was simply a “battle-hardened, amoral
   mercenary” with no qualms about taking the gold for himself.
   Presumably, he would have flown RI-002 to a remote airstrip
   where fellow “battle-hardened, amoral mercenaries” waited to
   kill the crew and take the gold.
         Initially, I dismissed this fantastic scenario as worthy
   of a Hollywood movie, but hardly of serious consideration.
   For if it were true, it meant that Bob Freeberg, one of the
   most decent people I have ever met, necessarily would have
   been an accessory to mass murder.
         Unfortunately, the discovery of the wreckage and the bodies
   of the presumed crew on Mount Punggur three decades afterward
   only brought the scenario into the realm of possibility. The swel-
   tering, sparsely populated lowlands lying along the flight path
   from Brantas to Bengkulu have a reputation for lawlessness. Per-
   haps when flying over this region, Bob might have claimed engine
   trouble and had been fortunate to spot a stretch of straight, level
   road where he could make an “emergency landing”.
         His accomplices would have been waiting in ambush. After
   disabling the RI-002 radio and flight systems, stranding the crew
   in this remote location, the robbers might have transported the
66                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
gold across the Malacca Strait through well-established smug-
gling routes. At some obscure port in Malaya, Siam, or Burma
Bob would have taken his share and vanished with a new identity.
In the meantime, the crew might have rigged makeshift repairs
to the Dakota and attempted to fly to the nearest Republican air
base, only to suffer catastrophic failure over Mount Punggur.
      Though this discovery of the wreckage and bodies absolves
Bob of cold-blooded homicide, the question remains of whether
he was capable of such a monstrous felony. I knew that Bob was
no stranger to the questionable characters found in the shadowy
world of East Asian freelance aviation. The deep social and ethnic
ties between Malaya and Sumatra would have allowed Bob to ar-
range with powerful figures in Singapore for armed accomplices
on the ground and safe passage for the gold out of Sumatra. And
Bob would certainly have been wise enough to recruit a couple
of “battle-hardened, amoral mercenaries” to come along for in-
surance. Though plausible to anyone familiar with the time and
place, this scenario rests on whether Bob could have betrayed his
employers, colleagues, and friends.
      To answer that question, I can only rely on my personal ap-
praisal of Bob's character, formed by long hours in the RI-002
cockpit and similarly lengthy periods sharing a bottle of whis-
key during stopovers in Singapore, Manila, or Bangkok. While I
firmly believe that even a quarter-ton of gold could not have en-
gendered such a radical reversal of character in an idealist such as
Bob Freeberg, I have no real proof that could definitively disprove
this dismaying version of events.
      The third scenario is the most disturbing of all. It is well
known in the local aviation community that several Dutch fight-
er pilots have boasted of shooting down RI-002 over Sumatra,
though none have offered supporting evidence. While an opera-
tion involving half of a squadron, like the purported intercep-
                      INSTITUTIONAL AMNESIA                          67
   tion and landing at Palembang, would have been impossible to
   conceal, documentation of an encounter involving a single pilot
   might not exist for any number of reasons, especially if the at-
   tacking pilot had lost visual contact in clouds and was unsure
   of the kill at the time. However, that theory invites the ques-
   tion: What happened to the gold?
         The crash site had been discovered twice in a five-year period
   by local residents roaming the hinterlands in search of land or for-
   est resources. While it is entirely possible that another group had
   stumbled upon the wreckage and found the gold at some point pri-
   or to April 1978, it is implausible that they could have spirited the
   gold away undetected. Many Indonesians believe that great wealth
   can be attained by supernatural means. Furthermore, Indonesians
   in general are notoriously bad at keeping secrets. The inevitable
   rumors of a mountain where gold can be plucked from the ground
   like fallen fruit would have spread far and wide, attracting hordes
   of mystic wealth-seekers to the steep slopes of Mount Punggur.
         However the indications are that someone had visited the
   site before April 1978. In his report, Sulaeman noted that heavy
   sections of fuselage had been moved and stacked, and that dis-
   turbed vegetation had not had sufficient time to regrow. Consid-
   ering growth rates of vegetation in the Sumatra rain forest, we
   can assume that a sizable group had visited the site less than a
   year before Sulaeman’s team. If those visitors had taken the gold,
   they most likely had been members of the Indonesian military. It
   is reasonable to assume that only a highly disciplined force (such
   as an elite military unit), could have carried away such a large
   amount of gold from this remote, rugged location in utter secrecy.
         If a military unit had visited the site only to take the gold
   and leave an important artifact of our history to be reclaimed by
   the forest, then the commanders would have committed a gross
   betrayal of the nation they had sworn to serve.
68                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      However, I am certain that this hypothetical larcenous field
commander and his men would disagree. The meager allowances
for operational expenses and even food have long compelled field
officers to source supplementary funding for their troops well-
being and even survival. In most cases, an officer would forge a
relationship with a local businessman, providing protection and
logistical support in exchange for a share of revenue. By strip-
ping a remote crash site of buried treasure, an officer could run
his outfit, buy a promotion in rank, and support his network
of dependents without the risk and bother of participating in
an illegal business arrangement.
      Our hypothetical officer would not be concerned about the
ransacking and concealing the existence of a historic remnant of
our struggle for freedom because, generally speaking, Indonesians
tend to prefer myth over history. The myth that our independence
was secured solely by our own devices: the soaring rhetoric of
Soekarno, the tactical genius of our military leaders, the bound-
less courage of village boys armed only with pointed sticks, has
no place for the foreigners, Asian or Western, who assisted us in
our struggle for freedom. I wondered if Bob might have uninten-
tionally served the cause of nationalist myth-making by conve-
niently vanishing off the face of the earth.
                      INSTITUTIONAL AMNESIA                        69
         6
         A CASE OF
         QUININE
         —
         M ANI LA
         June 1947
   Suryadarma had assumed that we could sell such a valuable cargo
   as quinine immediately and return directly to Jogjakarta. Repub-
   lican currency was worthless outside of Java and Sumatra, so
   Suryadarma had provided Pang, Boedi and myself with a small
   amount of American money for incidental expenses during the
   few days we expected to be in Manila.
        We first needed accommodation. Since there was no room to
   spare in Bob’s apartment, which he shared with two other Ameri-
   can pilots, Bob took us to the house of his good friend Tom Lee,
   an attorney working for the United States Veterans Administra-
   tion office in Manila. It was decided that I would stay with Tom
   and his family, while Boedi and Pang were taken in by Tom’s
   friend and colleague, Cliff Baldwin.
        The following morning, while I savored my first American
   breakfast, prepared by Tom’s lovely wife Marion, Bob appeared.
   Instead of his customary dress of khaki pants and shirt, Bob wore
   a tropical suit that struggled to contain his large frame. Bob no-
   ticed my surprise, and told me, embarrassed, that he had borrowed
   the suit from a somewhat smaller friend. That of course, raised
   the question of why Bob had gone to such lengths to appear well-
70                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
groomed. He provided the answer moments later when he asked
me to accompany him to a courthouse in the city. Bob explained
that he was due in court that morning to argue his side of an own-
ership dispute over the Dakota now registered as RI-002 and under
contract to the Republic of Indonesia. Bob thought it likely that
the judge would inquire about the registration and other matters
related to the flight to Java, and wanted me there to explain.
      This was an unanticipated and disturbing development.
Neither Suryadarma nor I had thought to ask Bob whether he
was the sole owner of the aircraft on which the survival of the
Republic might depend. Now, Bob was telling me that he had,
in fact, purchased the war-surplus Dakota the previous January
with another young American pilot based in Manila, Bob Walters,
sharing the six thousand dollar cost equally. Since Bob’s obliga-
tions with CALI had left him little free time, the two partners had
decided that Bob Walters would take responsibility for relocating
the aircraft from the point of purchase at Clarke Field to a private
airstrip where they would prepare it for service.
      Soon afterward, Bob Walters had insisted that since he had
performed the relocation, he was now entitled to a larger share.
Bob did not agree, and offered instead to buy Walters out. Walters
refused, leaving matters unresolved when Bob again left Manila
on CALI charter flights, including the blockade run to Jogjakarta.
When Bob returned to Manila, he discovered that Walters had
moved the Dakota to another airfield. Bob did not directly con-
front Walters, but waited until a sympathetic fellow pilot told Bob
where the Dakota was now parked.
      Freeberg found the Dakota and filed a civil case against Wal-
ters in the local court. The judge placed the Dakota in receivership
pending his final decision, but granted Freeberg permission to work
on the aircraft. However, by this time Bob had resigned from CALI.
Without a steady source of income, the costs of the litigation and
                           A CASE OF QUININE                         71
   refurbishing the Dakota were putting a severe strain on his ever-
   precarious finances. The sympathetic judge set 11 June 1947 as
   the date of the court session and granted Bob permission to make
   one flight out of the Philippines in the meantime for the purpose
   of a commercial charter. That flight, of course, had been to Java.
         In the court, the matter of the contract with the Air Force
   was not raised, so I was not asked to testify. After hearing from
   several witnesses and arguments from counsel, the judge decided
   to call for another session in ten days time. This was only the
   first of many days I would spend in a Manila court as Bob and I
   fought for RI-002 and her cargo of quinine.
         The spectacle of a decrepit aircraft registered with a hitherto
   unknown nation with an American captain and Javanese crew
   generated a media frenzy of curiosity in the following days. This
   publicity did not escape the notice of the local representatives of
   the Netherlands. Dutch Consul-General De Voogd formally peti-
   tioned the court to seize our cargo of quinine, which he contend-
   ed had been looted from Dutch plantations and factories. He even
   claimed custody over the three Javanese crew as Netherlands East
   Indies subjects! The court dismissed that assertion out of hand,
   but scheduled a hearing for the following week to resolve the
   dispute over the ownership of the quinine.
         The Dutch engaged the leading law firm DeWitt, Perkins
   and Ponce Enrile. But our side boasted Salipada Pendatun, a sit-
   ting senator as well as a practicing lawyer. Pendatun had taken a
   great interest in our cause. He was a Moro, born in the predomi-
   nantly Muslim region in the south of the Philippine archipelago,
   which has both geographical and cultural proximity to Indonesia.
   Highly respected for his military exploits during the Japanese oc-
   cupation of the Philippines, Senator Pendatun was a formidable
   adversary in court, as the Dutch would soon discover.
72                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      As plaintiffs, the Dutch presented their case first. Assuming
that we would base our defense upon our presumed rights as a
sovereign nation, the opposition threatened to demolish our en-
tire defense at a stroke by seemingly recognizing our right to self-
determination. However, the Dutch concept of self-determination
was quite distinct from ours. The Dutch stated that the islands
of the East Indies would be granted independence only when the
populations of the entire archipelago, not just those areas in Java
and Sumatra controlled by the Republic, agreed on the structure
of a future independent state. Until that day, the Netherlands East
Indies government would retain the sole authority to enter into
commercial agreements with non-Indonesian counterparts.
      The assertion that Indonesia would be independent, just
not yet, was indicative of the contradictory and condescending
Dutch attitude toward Indonesian self-determination. We be-
lieved that the proposed federal structure of semi-autonomous
regional states was only the latest expression of the Dutch policy
of divide and rule by which this tiny nation on the northern pe-
riphery of Europe had for centuries dominated a sprawling archi-
pelago halfway around the world.
      First as traders seeking a monopoly on the nutmeg and other
valuable spices flourishing in our lush tropical islands, then as ma-
rauders forcibly annexing strategic ports to defend their monopoly
against English competitors, and finally as a full-blown colonial
power controlling every facet of our lives, the Dutch had been
an unwelcome presence in our land and seas for more than three
centuries. Though Indonesian school textbooks confidently assert
that the Dutch had exercised total dominion over the Indonesian
archipelago since the days of the Spice Trade, this is only literally
true for Batavia, modern Jakarta, and other ports on the north and
west coasts of Java. Even then, for half of its existence Batavia was
                          A CASE OF QUININE                           73
   not the capital of colonial authority. It was basically a company
   town, the administrative headquarters of the Vereenigde Oost-In-
   dische Compagnie (VOC), the Dutch East India Company.
         Established by a consortium of Dutch merchants to control
   the Spice Trade, the VOC was the world's first joint-stock corpo-
   ration, vertically integrated with its own ships, provisioning ports,
   and armed forces. Solely concerned with wringing the last drop
   of profit from their spice monopoly, the VOC plundered and pil-
   laged for generations, sometimes wiping out the populations of
   whole islands to protect their interests.
         The rest of the archipelago, including the heartland of Java,
   remained under the control of hereditary rulers. Conditions in
   these areas could be oppressive as well. The rulers made lucrative
   agreements with the VOC to supply slave labor, or would confis-
   cate large portions of their subjects’ crops to sell to the Europeans.
         The VOC lost their spice monopoly when English ships man-
   aged to smuggle nutmeg seedlings to their own tropical territories,
   where they flourished. This hammer blow to their bottom line, along
   with massive corruption, mismanagement, and numerous other fac-
   tors, resulted in the VOC declaring bankruptcy in 1800. The Neth-
   erlands government took over VOC assets, beginning a process of
   formal colonization that would only be completed a century later.
         It was not a benign colonial system. The expenses of admin-
   istering the large islands of Java and Sumatra, along with coastal
   areas of other regions, proved daunting. To increase revenue, the
   government implemented a system of forced crop deliveries. The
   infamous Cultuurstelsel, the Cultivation System, compelled farm-
   ers to devote a certain portion of their land to growing commer-
   cially valuable crops such as sugar and coffee to be sold to the
   Dutch through local intermediaries at a fixed price.
         Though the obligation was initially manageable, the success
   of the Cultivation System and the greed of local elites pushed
74                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
the practice far beyond the point of sustainability. Already im-
poverished farmers could only bow their heads and comply as
their own nobles compelled them to dig up ever-larger tracks
of rice land to plant cash crops. But the low price they received
would never suffice to purchase the amount of food they once
grew to feed their families. Whole communities were decimated
by overwork and under-nourishment.
      In the 1820s, the egregious corruption and brutality of the
native aristocracy sparked a rebellion led by Diponegoro, the ide-
alistic crown prince of Jogjakarta. The Dutch won the Java War
by tricking Diponegoro into capture and exile, then consolidated
their authority throughout the heartland. Though the sultanates
remained absolute monarchies in theory, each king was assigned
a Dutch counterpart, called the Resident. The body language and
composition of official portraits (and later photographs) of the
ruling pair left no doubt where the real power lay.
      In the eastern islands, the Dutch found natural allies in the
corrupt petty kings who were willing, if not eager, to burden their
subjects with oppressive taxation and forced-labor obligations.
And everywhere, native-born Indonesians could not even aspire
to second-class citizenship in their own motherland. That dubi-
ous privilege was reserved for those non-Europeans who served
commercial interests, such as the large population of ethnic-Chi-
nese migrants who handled much of the trading and distribution
of rice and other essential goods throughout the archipelago.
      Not all regions surrendered willingly. The Acehnese, the
fiercely Islamic peoples of the northern tip of Sumatra, fought
a savage war of resistance for decades, while the kingdoms of
southern Bali maintained a precarious sovereignty until they, too,
were conquered at the turn of the Twentieth Century. But the to-
tal dominion of the Netherlands over the East Indies would last
for only a few decades. In the first months of 1942 the Japanese
                         A CASE OF QUININE                          75
   swept through the archipelago. The colonial government fled to
   Australia. Those Dutch (and other enemies of the Japanese) who
   stayed behind were summarily transported to internment camps.
        The Pacific War ended in August 1945. Within weeks, sev-
   eral battalions of British troops arrived to expedite the evacuation
   of European internees. In the interim, the Republicans were able
   to consolidate their power, building a rudimentary but effective
   administrative structure in both urban and rural areas of Java
   and Sumatra. In other regions, they enlisted the support of local
   aristocrats, who had asserted their hereditary rights to rule to
   avoid a disastrous power vacuum.
         In January 1946, the Dutch colonial officials returned from
   wartime exile in Australia and set to work reestablishing their
   administrative structure district-by-district as resources became
   available. However, they soon realized that reasserting colonial
   authority would not be as simple as reoccupying their desks in
   government offices. During the first weeks of January, the return-
   ing colonial officials set up their own administration in districts
   with government offices, major businesses, and elite residential
   areas, leaving control of native neighborhoods to the Republicans.
   Batavia became a patchwork of jurisdictions. In the course of a
   brief stroll, a person might pass through several colonial and Re-
   publican-controlled districts each with distinct policing and mu-
   nicipal services. Neither side was willing to cede authority over
   their turf, so sporadic street fighting was inevitable.
         Before these disturbances flared into a full-fledged conflagra-
   tion, the Republicans staged a strategic retreat to the heartland
   of Java. At the invitation of Sultan Hamengkubuwono IX, the
   Soekarno government relocated from Batavia to the historic town
   of Jogjakarta. There, in the shadow of the high walls of the royal
   palace (a potent, enduring symbol of Javanese resistance to Dutch
   rule) the new Republic would attempt to consolidate their au-
   thority and push for independence for all of Indonesia.
76                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      During the following months, Republican support grew rap-
idly, severely hampering Dutch efforts to reestablish the colonial
government. Eventually, the Dutch were forced to acknowledge
that pro-Republican sentiment dominated in most areas of Java
and Sumatra, while the Dutch were weakened from their own
wartime privations. They decided to negotiate.
      In November 1946, representatives of the Dutch colonial ad-
ministration and the Republic of Indonesia met in Linggarjati in
the highlands of western Java. Prime Minister Sutan Sjahrir led
the Indonesian team. One of a coterie of Dutch-educated intellec-
tuals who became the theoreticians of the nationalist movement,
Sjahrir strove to establish European-style representative demo-
cratic institutions to govern the new republic.
      Across the table sat the team led by Acting Governor-Gen-
eral Hubertus van Mook. Born in Semarang, a prosperous port
on the north coast of Java, van Mook was an Indo, the term
for Dutch citizens whose families had lived in the Netherlands
East Indies for more than one generation. The Indos regarded
these islands, not the small maritime nation on the other side
of the globe, as their homeland.
      Van Mook proposed the establishment of a semi-autono-
mous Netherlands-Indonesian Union, in which the former colony
would be broken up into self-governing states along ethnic lines.
These states, including the Republic of Indonesia, would then
be absorbed into a federation, along with the Dutch colonies of
Ghana and Suriname, under the nominal sovereignty of the Dutch
constitutional monarchy. Though van Mook believed that the tra-
ditional colonial system was best consigned to the history books,
and that each state should have the freedom to determine their
own laws and customs, he also believed that Indonesians, if left
by themselves, were not capable of managing a modern economy.
                         A CASE OF QUININE                         77
         In the proposed federal system Van Mook championed, each
   state would have equal power, but the Dutch government would
   be “first among equals”, with authority to override all major deci-
   sions, for an indefinite period. Bali, Sulawesi, and some other ar-
   eas in the eastern region of the archipelago immediately accepted
   this arrangement. In late 1946 they established Negara Indone-
   sia Timur, the State of Eastern Indonesia. Commonly known by
   the initials, NIT, the new state professed Republican ideals, even
   adopting Indonesia Raya, the Republican national anthem. We in
   the Republic itself did not hide our contempt of what we consid-
   ered a puppet state, claiming that NIT actually stood for Negara
   Ikut Tuan, the state that follows the master.
         A half-year later, in Manila, the Dutch lawyers touted the
   Linggarjati agreement as evidence that the Dutch were on the right
   side of history, proof that they would eventually grant us some
   form of independence. But our team adroitly changed strategy, re-
   casting the dispute in purely legalistic terms. We asserted that under
   international law, a colony in the process of gaining independence
   had the right to negotiate international commercial arrangements.
         To support our contention, we cited several cases of govern-
   ments-in-waiting being granted the right to conduct international
   trade as they prepared for full sovereignty. Opposing counsel then
   sidestepped the issue by noting that the quinine had been harvested
   from Dutch-owned plantations and processed at Dutch facilities, so
   the Republic of Indonesia could not claim ownership of the goods
   in dispute. Our team countered that the Dutch authorities had aban-
   doned the quinine by fleeing to Australia ahead of the invading Japa-
   nese, leaving the factory in the hands of the Indonesian staff.
         The plaintiff's lawyer dismissed this argument out of hand,
   and in doing so made a serious tactical error. In front of the judge
   (who was, of course, a native citizen of the Philippines) he claimed
   that Indonesian natives (and by inference colonized people in gen-
78                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
eral) did not possess the technical ability to process raw material
into quinine. Therefore, the cargo must have been processed by
the Dutch before the war. Even if it could be proved that the Japa-
nese had processed the quinine during the occupation, the Dutch
could still claim the cargo as war reparations.
      To bolster their case, the Dutch legal team had flown in an
agricultural researcher from the Netherlands. This expert would
testify that no factories were functioning during or after the Jap-
anese occupation and therefore the Indonesians could not have
manufactured quinine for export.
      Our side looked forward to cross-examining this witness,
hoping that we could portray him as an arrogant and conde-
scending white colonial. But Pendatun wisely opted for a much
safer route. He objected to the witness giving testimony on the
grounds that “a foreigner is not qualified to comment on the in-
ternal affairs of the Republic of Indonesia”. That statement went
over well both in court and in the media, as the Republic of the
Philippines had only the previous year won their own indepen-
dence from the Americans. The judge refused to allow the witness
to take the stand, and closed the hearing to deliberate the case.
Having done our best, we could now only stand by and wait for
a final decision to be rendered.
                         A CASE OF QUININE                          79
        7
        JAVANESE
        CELEBRITY
        —
        M ANI LA
        July 1947
   Early one morning in July 1947, my fitful sleep on the floor of a
   boarding-house room in Manila was broken by frantic knocking.
   With the ownership of the quinine still in dispute, Boedi, Pang,
   and I could not return to Jogjakarta. Nor could we continue to
   impose on the generous hospitality of Tom Lee and Cliff Baldwin.
   So the three of us had found this cramped room, laid down three
   frayed straw maps, and made the best of the situation.
        I rose, and opened the door to find two travel-rumpled but
   dignified Indonesian men. Heads popped out of adjacent door-
   ways. Language difficulties had hampered communication with
   our fellow lodgers, mostly itinerant laborers from rural areas.
   They assumed that Pang, Boedi, and myself (three young men
   with few belongings sharing a small room) were job-seekers from
   some distant island in the Philippine archipelago. They further as-
   sumed that our well-dressed visitors were recruiting us for a day's
   manual labor and hoped that they might be hired as well.
        In fact, the men calling on us were Soedjatmoko, future Am-
   bassador of the Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations, and
   the eminent Dr. Soemitro Djojohadikusumo, who would guide the
   process of formulating and implementing the economic policies of
80                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
an independent Indonesia in the decades to come. Soedjatmoko and
Soemitro were making a grand loop through Southeast Asia, solic-
iting international support before traveling to New York to open
a representative office for the Republic of Indonesia. They were
now requesting the assistance of the Republic of Indonesia's ad-
hoc military liaison team to the Republic of the Philippines (Pang
and myself) to arrange a meeting with President Manuel Roxas.
      I turned to our lawyer and mentor Senator Pendatun, who
was close to Roxas. His skilled legal representation in our court
case was the first of many services Pendatun would render our new
nation. In the months to come Pendatun would serve as a top-level
liaison between the new republics of the Philippines and Indonesia.
      The brief meeting with President Roxas went well. Roxas
believed that the two Southeast Asian republics had many com-
mon interests and should be mutually supportive. He prom-
ised to advocate on our behalf at the United Nations. This
marked the first significant victory in the diplomatic offensive
that (along with our military action) would eventually defeat
the Dutch and secure our freedom.
      While Soemitro and Soedjatmoko canvassed heads of state,
I directed my efforts to drumming up local support for our cause.
I felt this to be a top priority and the best use of my extended
stay in Manila. Besides the diplomatic support pledged by Pres-
ident Roxas, the Republic of the Philippines was in a position
to play an important practical role in our struggle. The huge
military facilities at Clarke Field and Subic Bay were filled with
surplus war materiel, and veteran American pilots, such as Bob,
filled the bars waiting for work. A widespread awareness of
our struggle might help us to find and recruit pilots and others
who would be useful to our cause.
      Until that time Indonesia was virtually unknown in Manila.
In government, within the military, or on the street, some may
                        J AVA N E S E C E L E B R I T Y             81
   have heard of the distant rumble in the south. Generally, though,
   the new Republic of the Philippines was too busy establishing
   itself firmly in the post-war family of nations to care about an
   uprising in the Netherlands East Indies.
         This all changed when RI-002 landed in Manila. Stories
   about Captain Freeberg and his “Javanese crew” appeared fre-
   quently in the newspapers, even pushing out news of a sensa-
   tional kidnap-murder case. Their curiosity piqued by the media
   coverage, numerous student and professional associations ap-
   proached us for information about the struggle for self-determi-
   nation being fought by their southern neighbors. As senior of-
   ficer and having the best command of English, I took on the role
   of official spokesperson for the Republic. I spent many pleasant
   and stimulating hours explaining how we transformed ourselves
   from oppressed colony to sovereign nation to inquisitive and
   highly appreciative audiences.
         I would begin my talks with the surprising admission that
   our struggle for self-determination started with a Dutchman.
   Eduard Douwes Dekker sailed to the East Indies in 1838 as a
   junior colonial administrator. During the subsequent decade, as
   he moved from post to post throughout the archipelago, Douwes
   Dekker witnessed the worst abuses of the Cultivation System. He
   made no secret of his outrage, and so was encouraged into early
   retirement from the civil service in 1851.
         Back in the home country, Douwes Dekker devoted his time
   to writing searing exposés of the colonial administration. When
   his strident pamphlets failed to arouse indignation (or even inter-
   est), Douwes Dekker changed tactics. He presented his denuncia-
   tions in the form of a droll narrative: the ostensible ghostwritten
   memoirs of a Dutch coffee trader. Max Havelaar: Or the Cof-
   fee Auctions of the Dutch Trading Company, deftly eviscerated
82                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
the pretensions of the Dutch merchant class while exposing and
condemning the brutality of the Cultivation System and the
endemic corruption it supported.
      Max Havelaar caused a sensation in Europe, where progres-
sive social movements were gaining ground against class privilege
and oppression. The embarrassment caused by Max Havelaar, and
the growing awareness that the current system was not sustainable,
eventually pushed the government to abandon the Cultivation Sys-
tem in favor of the Ethische Politiek, the “Ethical Policy”, which
emphasized the welfare and education of indigenous inhabitants.
      A key component of the new policy was a system of Dutch-
curriculum schools for the native elite, aimed at creating a cad-
re of administrators and skilled technical workers imbued with
progressive social values. On graduation, many of the best and
brightest enrolled in the Doktor Jawa program in the School tot
Opleiding van Inlandsche Artsen, School for the Training of Na-
tive Physicians, or STOVIA, in Batavia. The Doktor Jawa program
addressed another Ethical Policy concern: the almost complete
absence of public-health services outside of the European en-
claves. The STOVIA students were trained to treat minor injuries
and dispense medicines for common diseases, especially smallpox.
Essentially halfway between a nurse and a physician, the sizable
corps of Doktor Jawa produced by STOVIA did have a significant
impact in bringing rudimentary health care to thousands of vil-
lages—itself a revolutionary development.
      But the real legacy of STOVIA would grow from the ex-
tracurricular activities of the Doktor Jawa students. The native
elite considered STOVIA to be a prestigious institution. Leading
families from Java, Sumatra, and other regions of the Netherlands
East Indies sent their sons to study in Batavia. This is where the
Dutch made their fatal error. Bringing together young men with
good educations generated a lively exchange of views and experi-
                        J AVA N E S E C E L E B R I T Y            83
    ences. New ideas were propagated back to the regions though the
    extensive family and social connections of the students, engen-
    dering a wide-spread realization that even peoples from opposite
    ends of the archipelago had a great deal in common.
          The result was the formation in 1908 of Boedi Oetomo, No-
    ble Endeavor, an organization to promote the concept that the
    various peoples of the archipelago, though of different ethnicity,
    cultural expression, and religious belief, shared core values and
    a common heritage. Boedi Oetomo sparked the establishment
    of other organizations forming around social and professional
    groups, giving rise to the mass organizations and political parties
    that, in many cases, continue to influence public life in contem-
    porary times. As throughout modern Indonesian history, students
    were the vanguard of the nationalist movement. In 1928, a re-
    gional youth conference devised the rallying cry for the Indone-
    sian nation: the Sumpah Pemuda, the solemn pledge to uphold
   “One Nation, One People, One Language.”
          The “one language” was the key. As the nationalist movement
    gained momentum and conferences attracted participants from
    throughout the many isles of the Netherlands East Indies, they
    found themselves compelled to address gatherings in Dutch, their
    only common tongue being the language of their despised overlords.
   The logical first choice for a universal language would have been
   Javanese, spoken by the majority of inhabitants of this vast archipel-
    ago. But Javanese is not the easiest language to learn: different word
    forms and even vocabulary are used depending on the relative social
    status of speaker and listener. This linguistic structure reinforces the
    feudal attitudes that the Dutch used so successfully to secure their
    rule. Instead, the nationalists wisely chose a form of Malay used for
    centuries as a lingua franca by traders throughout Southeast Asia.
    Supplemented by wholesale importation of Sanskrit, Arabic, Eng-
    lish, and even Dutch terms, it rapidly developed into the rich and
    sophisticated Bahasa Indonesia, the language of the Indonesians.
84                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Armed with a communication tool that cut across cultural
and social boundaries, the nationalist movement gained consid-
erable influence. At first, we gave the Dutch little cause for com-
plaint. The writings of our leaders and theorists, all grounded in
progressive Western political philosophy and bound by our own
cultural traditions of avoiding outright confrontation, played
right into the European respect for freedom of speech. But the
growing influence of the nationalist leaders, and the noise gener-
ated by our strident young cadres, finally pushed the Dutch into
action. By the 1930s, the colonial government had cracked down
on nationalist activities, imprisoning or exiling all opponents,
from senior leaders to rank-and-file organizers.
      In my childhood home in Madiun, nationalism was a taboo
subject of discussion. My father was a patih, a civil administra-
tor. His position was a single step down from the bupati, the
ranking “native” administrator responsible for a district with
hundreds of thousands of households. The foundation of Dutch
power in Java was this system of governing through indigenous
civil servants. The system was basically feudal, with the native
officials serving solely at the pleasure of the Dutch authorities.
Not surprisingly, most patih devoted much of their time and en-
ergy (when not lining their own pockets) to ensuring that they
maintained a favorable impression in the eyes of their alien over-
lords so as to attain the position of bupati, at the same time
preparing at least one of their sons to enter the civil service and
take their place upon retirement.
      My father, on the other hand, strongly discouraged my
brother and me from setting our sights on a career in the native
bureaucracy, saying: “Before you become bupati you will never
be a free man.” Sadly, he would never enjoy his freedom. He died
suddenly in 1936, shortly after he was placed on the short list for
promotion to bupati in our district.
                        J AVA N E S E C E L E B R I T Y             85
         Out of our father's earshot, my siblings and I engaged in lively
   discussions about the nationalist movement. Kempoel, my eldest
   sister, was the most outspoken. Well regarded by her teachers at
   the junior high school in Madiun because of her fluency in Dutch,
   Kempoel nonetheless always carried a small merah-putih, the red-
   and-white flag that was the symbol of our nationalist movement, in
   her purse. One day, however, there was a theft reported at the school
   and all handbags were to be searched. With a shock Kempoel re-
   membered that she had the merah-putih hidden between her books.
         Fortunately, distress brought out her ingenuity. Kempoel hid
   the flag in the only place available, in her sandwich. At lunch, she
   discovered that the red dye from the new flag had seeped into
   the butter. Kempoel knew that she might raise suspicion by not
   eating, and at any rate she was famished, so she quickly gulped
   the sandwich down. That resulted in one of her few demerits. A
   teacher noticed the red stain on her lips, and admonished her
   for wearing lipstick in school!
         My family laughs when remembering this incident, but we
   do not forget that Kempoel and our father would have been in
   serious trouble had she been discovered. In the next years, teenag-
   ers like Kempoel would realizze that expressing nationalist senti-
   ments was not just mild rebellion, but a matter of life and death.
         While my sister wisely concealed her passionate conviction
   for the nationalist cause in order to work within the system, oth-
   ers broadcast their views to the world. Madiun, especially, was
   becoming a hot bed of dissent. Among the most outspoken activ-
   ists was a young firebrand named Soediro. Although the whole
   civil service corps in Madiun kept a watchful eye on this man, my
   father somehow liked and sympathized with the young teacher,
   now married and with a small child.
86                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Deep in his heart my father admired the man his superi-
ors viewed as a dangerous radical. One day, my father was in-
formed that Soediro was blacklisted and would soon be sen-
tenced to exile in Boven Digoel.
      This was serious. Boven Digoel was a malaria-ridden hell-
hole deep in the jungles of Dutch New Guinea established to hold
political activists detained during the communist-instigated social
uprisings of the 1920s. Ten years on, nationalists now constituted
a large fraction of the inmate population. In Boven Digoel, they
had little contact with the outside world, and, I suspect, the Dutch
hoped they would conveniently succumb to some tropical disease.
      My father was determined to have this harsh sentence re-
voked. He pleaded with the resident, the highest civil authority
in the Madiun area. He must have been quite convincing, as the
sentence was indeed revoked, but on the condition that Soediro
pack up and leave Madiun forever.
      But the Dutch colonists could not hope to stem the tide
of nationalism. As the colony prospered between the wars, the
growing need to source labor for mines, oil fields, and plantations
brought individuals from throughout the archipelago to work to-
gether, and often to marry and raise families far from their home
villages. In the melting pots of Batavia, Surabaya, and Medan,
the common people of the archipelago, like the educated elite of
a previous generation, discovered that fundamental similarities
in core social values and approaches to religious belief far out-
weighed minor differences in local rituals and customs. Whether a
Javanese farmer watching a wayang shadow-puppet performance
in the hot plains of central Java, a Batak plantation worker pray-
ing in his cool highland church, or a Bugis seafarer battling the
waves on his pinisi cargo schooner; all of the peoples of the vast
East Indies archipelago comprised a single nation: Indonesia.
                         J AVA N E S E C E L E B R I T Y             87
Pe t i t M u h a r t o (lef t ) wit h
pare n t s a n d s ib ling s
in 1928.
         88                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
                                  Pe t it Muhar t o (le ft ) and his
                                b rot he r Pe de d Muhardi p os e
                                    w it h t he Jap ane s e s oldie r
                                       as s igne d t o m onit or t he
                                   act iv it ie s of t he p rom ine nt
                                    K ar t odirdjo fam ily dur ing
                                                   t he occup at ion.
J AVA N E S E C E L E B R I T Y                              89
   pepper me with questions, eager to learn every detail of a struggle
   for freedom that had been much like their own. My talks gen-
   erated significant attention in the press and among diplomatic
   circles, which greatly annoyed the Dutch legation. Decades later,
   I would be delighted to see my name mentioned in Dutch gov-
   ernment archives. In a dispatch to his minister of foreign affairs,
   the Dutch consul general in Manila told of a meeting with Phil-
   ippines Vice President Elpidio Quirino. In the meeting, Quirino
   had spontaneously promised to curtail my “propaganda for the
   Indonesian cause among Filipino youths”. However, the gov-
   ernment would take no action against me, nor even express the
   slightest disapproval of my efforts.
         I suspect Quirino was purposely leading the Dutch astray
   because, on another, wholly clandestine level, the Philippines mili-
   tary was actively supporting our cause. Pang and I managed to
   form close ties with the intelligence corps of the Philippines army,
   who would assist us greatly with logistic and other support on
   subsequent blockade runs. Like the medical students from far-
   flung islands forging alliances while chatting over coffee in the
   STOVIA canteen, Filipinos and Indonesians now pledged mutu-
   al support in the struggle to build modern nations where once
   had stood colonial backwaters.
90                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      8
      DUTCH
      AGGRESSION
      —
      M ANI LA
      July 1947
With plenty of time but little money during our extended sojourn
in Manila, we sought to busy ourselves as best we could. A favor-
ite activity was to visit news stands to scan the foreign newspa-
pers and magazines for reports about the situation in the Republic.
These imported publications were expensive, so when we encoun-
tered an informative article, we might pool our funds to purchase
a copy. In most cases, however, one of us would read the piece as
rapidly as possible before being chased away by the owner.
      Our other major source of news was the radio set in the
common area of our boarding house. This was the sole means of
entertainment for the tenants, and usually tuned to stations play-
ing popular music or comedy performances. This radio was also
capable of receiving short-wave broadcasts. On most evenings
Boedi, Pang, and I would gather around the set to listen to inter-
national news programs, including those from our own Radio
Republic Indonesia station in Jogjakarta, until the other tenants
insisted that we tune back to a local station.
      However, throughout the afternoon and evening of 21 July
1947, we were deaf to their entreaties as we listened with mount-
ing horror to reports of a Dutch invasion of Republican terri-
                         DUTCH AGGRESSION                           91
   tory. We learned that mechanized columns had swept out from
   Batavia, Bandung, and Surabaya to invade almost all of the ar-
   eas held by the Republic. In Java, the Dutch took control of all
   deep-water ports. In Sumatra, they secured plantations and oil
   and coal installations around populated areas. Caught by sur-
   prise, our forces could only vanish into the hinterland or retreat
   to Jogjakarta to make a last stand.
         Throughout the day, we waited for news that Jogjakarta
   had fallen. But by late afternoon, the troops in Java had halted
   their advance a few score kilometers to the north of the city. We
   would realize later that the Dutch had only wanted control over
   the agricultural and other resources they needed to support the
   one hundred thousand troops that had been brought in to retake
   control of the archipelago. In view of the heavy losses that would
   be incurred from a direct assault on the capital, they opted in-
   stead to starve us into submission.
         That day also saw the Dutch lose possession of another, highly
   symbolic agricultural product. The court had finally handed down
   its verdict over the ownership of the quinine—in our favor! The
   customs office was instructed to release to us the cargo of quinine.
   This was a milestone victory for the Republic. For the first time, a
   neutral legal authority had validated our claims of legitimacy.
         The court victory and the appalling news from the south
   rekindled interest in our cause among the Filipinos. I redou-
   bled my propaganda efforts, granting interviews and speaking
   to student groups and other associations eager to learn about
   our struggle. When speaking at a university, my hosts would
   make note of my academic credentials, introducing me as
   the medical student turned pilot.
         Of course I was not a pilot. I had only identified myself as
   the RI-002 co-pilot to the Filipino aviation authorities to save
92                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
Bob from possible penalties or even a suspension of his captain’s
license for not meeting the crew requirements of an international
flight in a Dakota. But the medical student part was perfectly true.
      I enrolled in medical school in 1938. This was not the Dok-
tor Jawa program of an earlier era: I would graduate with the
equivalent of a European degree in medicine. I was diligent in
my studies, and looked forward to an interesting and useful
career as a physician. When I started my final year in 1941 I
was not aware of events that would soon change the trajecto-
ry of my career, and of history.
      An ancient Javanese prophesy states that a white buffalo will
plow the earth for centuries, but will be driven off by a horde of
yellow monkeys, who will remain in Java for the life of a corn
plant. The Japanese swept through Southeast Asia in the weeks
after Pearl Harbor, driving the Dutch from all areas of the ar-
chipelago by mid-1942. As prophesied, the Japanese occupied
Indonesia for about three years, in that period overturning the
social and political structure of the archipelago and setting the
stage for Indonesian independence.
      Initially, we regarded the Japanese as fellow-Asian liberators,
and were only too happy to lend our assistance. Of course, our
views quickly changed after it became apparent that the Japanese
were even more oppressive than our previous overlords. In an in-
equitable redistribution of wealth unmatched since the days of the
Cultivation System, the Japanese bought at low prices (or confis-
cated outright) crops and other resources needed to feed their war
machine. Thousands of my fellow Indonesians were sent to labor
camps. Though not subjected to the brutal horrors endured by the
enemy internees, many succumbed to disease and malnutrition.
      As a medical-school student, I was allowed to remain in
Batavia and continue my studies. But my comfortable academ-
ic life ended when a fellow student was slapped in the face by
                          DUTCH AGGRESSION                            93
   our Japanese instructor in front of the entire class. This was an
   intolerable humiliation for a high-born Javanese person. I led a
   protest against the instructor and was immediately imprisoned
   along with eight of my classmates. We spent a hellish week in a
   Japanese military prison and were then expelled. Fearing exile
   to a labor camp now that I was no longer in university, I fled
   Batavia for Semarang, where I kept a low profile and found em-
   ployment as a high-school teacher.
         Other Indonesians with useful skills (and the temperament
   to keep their peace in the face of Japanese arrogance) were put
   in technical positions recently vacated by the Dutch. This would
   have far-lasting consequences. The “natives” that the Dutch in-
   sisted were too unskilled and irresponsible to be entrusted with
   the management of public utilities were now running the trains,
   lighting the streets, and regulating the distribution of all-impor-
   tant irrigation water for our rice fields. Our self confidence grew
   as each day we proved that Dutch paternalism had been both
   pernicious and completely without justification. When, eventually,
   the Japanese departed, we would be fully prepared to become not
   only the masters of our own homeland, but the managers, engi-
   neers, and technicians as well.
         Nine days after the Dutch invaded and occupied our home-
   land, we had our revenge. On the morning of 29 July 1947, two
   squadrons of refurbished Japanese aircraft took off from Magu-
   wo and headed toward Dutch military bases near Semarang. In
   a symbolic gesture of defiance, our pilots dropped a few small
   bombs on the facilities, injuring no one and causing little dam-
   age. Nevertheless, the legendary Ambarrawa Raid dealt a devas-
   tating blow to Dutch complacency.
         That afternoon, the Dutch would score their own victory
   with far more devastating consequences. Shortly before nightfall,
   two Dutch Kitty Hawk fighters shot down a blockade-running
   Dakota as it approached Maguwo, killing all on board.
94                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
                 Pe t it Muhar t o at m e dical
                            s chool in 1941
DUTCH AGGRESSION                     95
        The aircraft, VT-CLA, had been a frequent visitor to Ma-
   guwo that year, bringing in medical and other supplies from India.
   It had also served as clandestine transport to India for military
   personnel and high officials. The most recent mission had been
   to fly Sutan Sjahrir’s children to the safety of an Indian board-
   ing school after the Dutch aggression of the previous week. On
   that tragic day VT-CLA was returning from Singapore, carrying
   as passengers Agustinus Adisucipto, the pilot who had rebuilt
   and flown the iconic Banteng biplane, and another senior aviator,
   Abdurrahman Saleh. Authorities in Batavia had been informed
   through their intelligence operatives in Singapore that two se-
   nior Air Force aviators would be on the flight. With this informa-
   tion, the Dutch attempted to portray the Dakota as a military
   transport and Alexander Constantine, the RAF veteran pilot-
   ing the aircraft, as a mercenary.
        With VT-CLA gone, the Republic was now truly isolated. The
   Dutch aggression had reduced our proud Republic into an over-
   crowded, impoverished enclave in central Java and a handful of
   outposts on Sumatra's windswept west coast. Our only hope of
   regular contact with the outside world lay in RI-002. But we were
   stuck in Manila, our cargo unsold, and no funds at our disposal. As
   refugees poured into Jogjakarta and the Dutch consolidated their
   military advantage, we could only sit in a distant land and wait.
96                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      9
      DOWN AND OUT
      IN MANILA
      —
      M ANI LA
      August 1947
The Dutch aggression dramatically increased the urgency of
bringing the conflict in the former Netherlands East Indies to the
attention of the United Nations Security Council. In New York,
Soemitro and Soedjatmoko lobbied to place the “Indonesia Ques-
tion” on the council agenda. During July and August the council
debated the legitimacy of Indonesia’s claims to nationhood. Aus-
tralia championed her neighbor to the north by characterizing
the Dutch aggression and subsequent skirmishes as armed con-
flict between two states in international law, while other mem-
bers noted that the Linggarjati agreement asserted the indepen-
dent status of Indonesian states.
      Only representatives of sovereign states may be seated at the
Security Council. Indonesia chose Sutan Sjahrir for the honor. A
nationalist leader of equal stature to Soekarno and Hatta, Sutan
Sjahrir had served as prime minister during the two first years
of independence, then had resigned to concentrate on garnering
international support for our nation's cause. Fiercely intelligent
and regarded as a voice of reason and civility among the many
radicals and demagogues on all sides, Sutan Sjahrir was the natu-
ral choice to represent Indonesia on the world stage.
                     DOWN AND OUT IN MANILA                         97
         On 14 August 1947, the Dutch representatives could only
   curse under their breath as Sutan Sjahrir entered the Security
   Council chamber and took his assigned seat. He gave a brief his-
   tory of the nationalist movement, noting that a widespread sense
   of national awareness throughout the archipelago far predated
   the Japanese occupation. He demolished the Dutch arguments
   point-by-point, and asked that the Security Council appoint a
   commission to arbitrate the dispute between the Republic of
   Indonesia and the Netherlands.
         Sjahrir's persuasive address gained our cause considerable
   support in the United Nations, as many delegates and func-
   tionaries held strong anti-colonial views. The United States of-
   fered to establish the committee requested by Sjahrir, with it-
   self as the neutral member. Australia stepped forward to rep-
   resent Indonesia; while Holland’s neighbor, Belgium, a nation
   with its own notorious history of colonial exploitation in Af-
   rica, represented the Netherlands.
         In September 1947, the Committee of Good Offices was
   dispatched to visit the Republican-controlled areas of the East
   Indies and make recommendations to the Security Council. The
   distinguished committee members assumed this task with the best
   of intentions and the worst of prospects. With no real authority
   beyond the perceived moral stature of the United Nations, the
   GOC, as it was generally known, could only act as the voice of
   reason in a situation dominated by bluster and posturing.
         While our senior diplomats were being feted by world states-
   men in New York, Boedi, Pang, and I were struggling to survive
   in Manila. The high spirits we felt when the court granted us the
   right to sell our cargo of quinine (and the vanilla, which had not
   been in dispute) evaporated as we realized that finding buyers
   would be very difficult. We estimated that the cargo would be
98                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
worth anywhere from fifteen to thirty thousand dollars. How-
ever, in the Philippines, the local merchants were not familiar with
dried vanilla beans or with quinine in powdered form.
     “That's a lot of ice-cream,” people would say about the eleven
cases of vanilla. When Boedi was diagnosed with malaria, people
would exclaim in mock astonishment: “How is that possible? You
have a plane full of quinine!”
      The meager amounts Suryadarma had given us for our daily
living expenses soon vanished. By mid July, Pang, Boedi, and I
were subsisting on one meal a day: a plate of madras curry taken
at an eating house located a kilometer from our boarding house.
      Bob was in similarly dire straits having spent most of his
ready cash refurbishing the Dakota and paying legal fees ac-
crued during his fight with Bob Walters. Though Bob generally
ate at his apartment, he would often make a point of joining us
for our single daily meal. In fact, Bob did not have to share our
discomforts to this degree. His former employer, CALI, assured
Bob that he could return to the company at any time. But Bob
was adamant on making a go of it himself. Bob truly believed that
he was still our captain, and would not abandon us until he had
safely returned his crew to Java.
     While satisfying, my “propaganda” activities did little to help
our financial situation. At most, I might receive a cup of coffee and a
snack after speaking to an association of students or professionals.
      On one occasion, though, after a warmly received lecture to
the Women's Lawyers Association, I was presented with a cash
honorarium. Though these affluent professionals clearly regarded
the gift as simply a symbolic gesture of moral support, such was
our dire economic straits that even this modest sum made a sig-
nificant improvement in our situation. However, when I told Bob
of my windfall, his sharp and unexpected retort was:
     “Never accept anything for nothing.”
                       DOWN AND OUT IN MANILA                           99
          Tom Lee also provided occasional respite from our financial
    distress. We would often meet for a beer or dinner along with Bob,
    but sometimes Tom would invite only Boedi, Pang, and myself
    and insist on treating us to a substantial meal. On these occasions,
    Tom would encourage us to talk about our blockade-running ad-
    ventures. Once having been a desk jockey myself, I could well
    imagine Tom’s desire to vicariously experience our adventures.
          Tom was also eager to hear my views about life in the Repub-
    lic. He seemed knowledgeable about the Byzantine internal politics
    of our revolution: the constantly shifting alliances among regional,
    religious, and military factions. Tom would ask detailed, incisive
    questions about the military and political leaders I met during the
    course of my duties, and of the general attitude and commitment
    to the Republic of the common people I met in daily life.
          I was thrilled that Tom wished to truly understand our strug-
    gle. Tom was a senior government employee with an extensive
    network of contacts in Washington. I hoped that he might com-
    municate my descriptions of our heartfelt commitment to free-
    dom to his colleagues, and perhaps even suggest reconsideration
    of America’s unequivocal support for the Dutch.
          While Sutan Sjahrir was brilliantly making the case for In-
    donesian self-determination before the Security Council, Bob was
    making his case, (perhaps not as brilliantly but with equal pas-
    sion) for the ownership of RI-002. Like the Republic, Bob faced
    an intransigent, sometimes irrational, opponent. Bob Walters had
    a reputation among the foreign pilots as a liar and a thief. Tom
    suspected that Walters had already sold his share of the Dakota
    to another party and was intentionally dragging on proceedings
    to conceal this characteristic bit of chicanery.
          Senator Pendatun offered to use his position to launch an
    investigation against Walters, with the goal of having him de-
    ported as an undesirable alien. Tom strongly advised against this.
100                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
Though getting rid of Walters would solve the immediate prob-
lem, the failure to bring the case to a definitive legal conclusion
would likely cause difficulties in the future.
     Bob agreed, and resigned himself to be patient while the
wheels of justice continued their stately rotation. I, too, was re-
lieved. The legal dispute gave the Dutch yet another excuse to paint
Bob as a freebooting adventurer of dubious business ethics, not
the wholly legitimate aviation-services supplier I knew him to be. I
anticipated the day when the court ruled in Bob’s favor and he took
uncontested possession of the aircraft we proudly called RI-002.
     Of the three of us, Boedi had the least difficulty making friends
in Manila. Fluent in English and quick to laugh, he became quite
popular among the foreign adventurers living in or passing through
Manila. Through conversations with these foreigners, Boedi was
able to learn about Bob’s life before that fateful flight to Java—in-
formation Bob was reluctant to volunteer on his own.
     Bob had returned to Manila in October 1946, a few months
after being demobilized from the US Navy. Because Bob had
joined the war relatively late, after cessation of hostilities in the
Pacific Theater in August 1945 he continued on active duty while
most of his fellow officers boarded ships destined for home. Dur-
ing the rest of the year, Bob hopped among assignments around
the Pacific and Australia assisting to decommission allied air bases.
     When Bob finally did return to Kansas, he discovered that
most of the available positions in commercial aviation had already
been filled by the wave of returning veterans. Furthermore, mar-
ried men were given preference for any new piloting jobs. Bob was
faced with the prospect of putting aside his passion for flight and
joining his father at the railroad, the largest employer in the town.
     Instead, Bob wrote to pilots of his acquaintance who had
elected to stay in Asia after their discharge. All held Bob in the
highest professional regard, marveling at the ability of “Fearless
                      DOWN AND OUT IN MANILA                           101
    Freeberg” to land any type of aircraft on a dime. In time, I, too,
    would learn to take my friend's extraordinary piloting skills for
    granted, and could relax in the air knowing that what seemed to
    be reckless maneuvers were, in fact, executed well within his abil-
    ity to keep the aircraft under perfect control.
          Bob’s reputation among the aviators led to a generous of-
    fer by Commercial Air Lines Incorporated (CALI), an air-charter
    company based in Manila. Within days of his arrival, Bob was in
    the co-pilot seat of a CALI C-47, flying cargo and passengers to
    and from Hong Kong, Singapore, and Bangkok.
          Civilian aviation was booming in the region. Local business-
    men who had survived the war with their fortunes intact bought up
    war-surplus troop carriers and freighters for minimal sums. With
    clients throughout East Asia clamoring for service as the war-torn
    nations and colonies rebuilt their economies, the newly minted air
    barons sought out adventurous veteran aviators from the victori-
    ous nations, particularly the United States, Britain, and Australia.
          Volatile politics and armed insurgencies provided endless
    opportunities to seasoned pilots willing to offer their services to
    nationalist rebels, beleaguered colonial governments, and anyone
    else with sufficient cash in hand and something that needed to be
    transported across hostile territories. Bob immediately became a
    member in good standing of the Aviation Brotherhood, a loose-
    knit professional association dedicated to mutual support and
    to boisterous relief of the stresses of their high-risk occupation.
    Most members of this band of brothers were simply professional
    pilots, like Bob, who had been unable to find suitable employ-
    ment in their home countries, all of which had a post-war surfeit
    of experienced aviators. Others were restless veterans seeking to
    recapture the thrill and danger of battle. A few were borderline
    criminals, who openly boasted of enormous profits made running
    weapons, opium, and other contraband.
102                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
       With few qualified local aviators available, the Southeast
Asian air barons were almost entirely dependent on the foreign
pilots who, at any moment, could leave in search of bluer skies.
That realization, combined with natural Asian hospitality, thrust
Bob into a world wholly unlike the work-a-day life of a commer-
cial airline pilot in the United States.
       At every overnight stop (and often at his base in Manila)
Bob was feted like a prince, with multiple invitations for drinks,
dinner, and nightclubbing from clients and relatives of his em-
ployer—even total strangers. Bob's farm-boy appetite would be
put to the test with lavish banquets. To his credit, Bob would try
any unfamiliar dish at least once. He grew to love the spicy cur-
ries that characterize many regional cuisines.
       There was also no shortage of after-hours diversion for this
tall, strong-bodied, pleasant-faced, soft-spoken American. Bob was
too much of a gentleman to indulge in locker-room bragging about
his adventures with women, and I suspect that what details he did
confide in me over a bottle of whiskey were only part of the story.
       Bob had great sympathy and respect for these young wom-
en, many of whom had experienced terrible suffering during the
Japanese occupation. He could understand their desire to find an
American husband and the opportunity to seek a stable, comfort-
able life in the United States. What amused him were the daugh-
ters of families living at Clarke and Subic Bay military bases. Bob
and the other single pilots were the constant objects of advances
by the daughters. They were also under the scrutiny of the moth-
ers trying to determine whether the young man her daughter fan-
cied was a dissolute fly-boy or a serious career-seeker who could
be relied upon to provide for a family. The consensus seemed to
be that Bob would, indeed, make a fine husband. But it remained
to be seen how good a provider he might become.
                       DOWN AND OUT IN MANILA                       103
          This active social life called for a good suit of clothes. In East
    Asia, as in most areas of the world, aviation is considered to be a
    high-status occupation. A pilot is expected to dress well for all but
    the most casual social occasions.
          Bob was surprised to discover that keeping up appearances
    posed significant difficulties. Bob was large even for a westerner;
    bespoke suits were his only option. However, wartime disruption
    of trade networks had raised the price of most non-local goods,
    including suits tailored from imported fabric. Bob decided it
    would be cheaper to have the suits made in Kansas, and asked his
    family to have three Palm Beach suits, made of a warm-weather
    blend of cotton and mohair, tailored to his size and sent to Ma-
    nila. That had been six months ago. To date, there was no sign of
    the suits, and having already sent a considerable sum back home,
    he did not want to deplete his meager savings by ordering suits in
    Manila. For the time being, Bob was forced to squeeze his large
    frame into a borrowed jacket when he needed to dress well, and
    hope that his suits would arrive on the next boat from America.
          The suits were a minor annoyance, not a major issue, as Bob
    usually wore his khaki flying gear. Bob was in the air most days,
    often flying an eight-hour round trip from Manila to Hong Kong.
    This demanding schedule rapidly built up his flying hours. By the
    end of his first month at CALI he was wholly comfortable at the
    controls of a C-47, although, as he ruefully admitted to a fellow
    aviator, he still bounced on landing.
          He would not bounce for long. Bob spent much of his initial
    earnings on fuel and runway fees, practicing landing and other
    maneuvers with borrowed aircraft. His goal was to qualify as a
    C-47 captain as soon as possible.
          This was a sensible career ambition for a pilot working in
    the East Asia region. The C-47 is the military version of the DC-3,
    the twin-engine aircraft developed by the Douglas Aircraft com-
104                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
pany in the 1930s that revolutionized commercial air transport
through significant advances in range and reliability. The rugged
C-47 is the pickup truck of the skies: simple to maintain, able to
fly in almost any condition and to land on (and take off from)
the roughest airstrips. Often called a Dakota (the British military
term for the aircraft), the C-47 was ideally suited to pioneer the
new aviation opportunities in post-war East Asia.
      But this dedication to pursuing professional qualifications
was not solely for the purpose of boosting his career. Bob had
bigger plans: he wanted to start his own charter air carrier. As
pilot, Bob was fully aware of the value of his cargoes and the fees
charged by the company. He saw the air-charter business for the
gold mine it was and looked to profit from it himself.
      The vibrant social life of a foreign pilot in Southeast Asia
brought Bob into contact with numerous potential business part-
ners and investors. By January 1947, Bob had set up a company
with a fellow pilot (one of his housemates in Manila), a lawyer
based in Singapore, and an investor from neighboring Malaya.
The company, Southeastern Airlines, purchased an airplane from
India and looked to start passenger services.
      That would only be the start. Bob took me to Clarke Air
Force Base, the huge American facility near Manila, to see the
store of military aviation hardware: North American P-51 Mus-
tangs, Republic P-47 Thunderbolts, Curtiss C-46 Commandos. I
stood at one end of a row of parked Dakotas and could barely
see the other end. Pointing at the line of aircraft, Bob said that a
whole commercial fleet was ready to be purchased and put into
service. I marveled at Bob’s great dreams, and had little doubt
that he had the ability and dedication to bring them into reality.
                     DOWN AND OUT IN MANILA                          105
         10
         OFFICIAL
         SOURCES
         —
         JAKARTA
         March 1991 – April 1992
    During sixteen months in the near-constant company of Indone-
    sians, Bob Freeberg came to share our contempt for our former
    colonial masters. To our great amusement, Bob once explained
    how English colloquial phrases often use the term “Dutch” to de-
    note something that is false or counterfeit. For example, a Dutch
    Treat is when you are invited to dinner but must pay for your own
    meal; Dutch Courage is gin; and Double Dutch is gibberish. In
    turn, I described a Dutch Wife, the absorbent cylindrical bolster
    we Indonesians wrap our arms and legs around to keep comfort-
    able during a sweltering tropical night.
         However, there is one term, at least in relation to the case of
    RI-002, which denotes something wholly authentic: Dutch Denial.
    From the day of the first report that RI-002 had failed to arrive
    as scheduled in Bengkulu, the Dutch insisted that they had no
    involvement in (or even knowledge of) the fate of Bob Freeberg.
         At the time, the Dutch colonial government had considered
    the disappearance of RI-002 to have been an accident; a plau-
    sible explanation given the fierce storms that can develop sud-
    denly in the tropical highlands, especially during the afternoon
    when RI-002 had been flying. But Indonesian Air Force com-
106                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
mand, at least unofficially, had been skeptical of the Dutch ex-
planation. Freeberg and his aircraft had been on Dutch radar
(metaphorically if not literally) as he flew with impunity through
what the Dutch considered to be their sovereign air space. Many
believed that the Dutch authorities knew more about the disap-
pearance than they would admit.
     Perhaps those authorities knew the fate of the gold cargo.
No trace had been found at the crash site. At the time of the dis-
appearance, salacious rumors had abounded, fueled in no small
part by defamatory comments from the colonial government and
Dutch-language newspapers in Batavia. Many believed that Free-
berg had somehow absconded with the gold and had ended his
days (or might still be alive) in a comfortable, secluded retirement.
     In 1991, I filed formal requests for information from the
Dutch Embassy in Jakarta. My intention was to use my thorough
command of the Dutch language to read between the lines of
whatever documentation they gave me in the hopes of finding
clues to this increasingly baffling mystery.
     I also hoped that, through the passage of time, old wounds
would have healed and the Dutch would be more likely to be
forthcoming about the incident. Certainly, in the years after the
transfer of sovereignty, our former colonial masters outdid them-
selves in attempts to correct past wrongs. A generation of Indone-
sian engineers, doctors, and other professionals owe their careers
to “colonial-guilt” scholarships at leading universities in the Neth-
erlands. Dutch corporations in joint ventures with local businesses
have helped to bring the essentials of modern life to Indonesians
throughout the archipelago. Young Dutch adventurers, using their
advantage of a shared language with many older, educated Indo-
nesians, established export-oriented enterprises in tourism, handi-
crafts, and other village-based industries, pumping significant
amounts of money directly into the neediest sectors of society.
                          OFFICIAL SOURCES                            107
          Some weeks after filing my request, I received a batch of of-
    ficial records relating to the post-war period, along with a cover
    letter from the military attaché at the embassy. At first glance, the
    documents supported the contention that RI-002 had crashed into
    a remote mountainside, where it lay undiscovered for decades. One
    document, a policy memo, stated that although the Dutch govern-
    ment had intended to grant the Republic some form of self-determi-
    nation at a future date, at the time of the disappearance of RI-002
    the colonial administration and military remained in control of air-
    space over Republican areas. They also claimed exclusive authority
    over the movement of people and goods into the Republic from
    other nations. If an aircraft flying to Republican territory did not
    land first at a Dutch airport for cargo and passenger inspection, or
    refused to follow the instructions of a Dutch military aircraft if in-
    tercepted over Republican-held territory, it would be considered to
    be a violation of sovereignty.
          International convention permitted the use of any measures
    to address such a violation, including deadly force. If a Dutch
    patrol had intercepted RI-002 and shot it down, the incident
    would have been noted in flight logs as a legitimate military ac-
    tion against a foreign intruder. I was not surprised to learn from
    these documents that RI-002 had been singled out with a stand-
    ing order to intercept under any circumstances, even if encoun-
    tered flying between Republican destinations.
          The documents provided no answers—or even important
    new information. They offered no reason for the strange absence
    of flight logs or the other anomalies. The cover letter only reiter-
    ated the official position that there was no record of interference
    of RI-002 by Dutch aircraft. The letter ended with the note that
    RI-002 was an “illegal aircraft flying arms, valuable cargoes, and
    contraband in the service of insurgents”.
108                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Despite decades of reconciliation and cooperation, that letter
might have been written in 1948, not 1991. I saw little reason to
make further inquiries to officialdom in the Netherlands. With
Dutch Denial forming an impenetrable barrier, I would have to
seek out the truth through other means.
      Having obtained little information of value from Indonesian
documents, and what I suspected to be outright disinformation
from military officials in the Netherlands, I turned to the next log-
ical source, the Americans. I knew from my days in the diplomatic
service that the American government was not likely to be con-
cerned about the activities of a law-abiding (at least in non-Dutch
eyes) private citizen in foreign territory. However, the Dutch had
been very concerned about Bob, and vocal in their condemnation
of his activities. This might have made Bob a “person of interest”
to American diplomats, who then might have observed his move-
ments and kept records that I could access.
      I began the process of searching the American official ar-
chives in 1992 with a visit to the offices of the United States In-
formation Service in the American Embassy in Jakarta. To my sur-
prise and delight, Pamela Hyde Smith, the press attaché, shared
my enthusiasm for investigating the mystery of RI-002. Pamela
and her staff would devote considerable time and effort to navi-
gating the labyrinth of official archives on my behalf.
      The first documents they requested were the most obvious:
Bob's naval service record. These were considered to be public in-
formation, and I soon received copies of the documents in the mail.
      This was dry reading, no more than lists of events and
dates. Yet they evoked in me strong emotions. Bob had spoken
little of his war experiences. His few anecdotes emphasized the
difficulty of the mission while depreciating his own contribu-
tion. However, I knew from conversations with his colleagues
in the Aviation Brotherhood that during his brief career as a
                          OFFICIAL SOURCES                            109
    navy pilot Bob Freeberg had been renowned for courage, calm-
    ness under pressure, and incredible skill. Decades after our ac-
    quaintance, I would finally learn of his exceptional high regard
    in the eyes of his government.
          The records stated that Bobby Earl Freeberg (Bobby, not Rob-
    ert, was his legal name) was born in McCune, Kansas (a town near
    his boyhood home of Parsons) on 23 February 1921. In 1942, Bob
    enlisted as a naval cadet, spending two years in pilot training and
    college at Fort Scott, Kansas. He graduated at the top of his class,
    was commissioned in March 1944 and sent to the Pacific Theater.
          Bob served most of his wartime tour with Bulldog Squad-
    ron, a Liberator search-and-patrol unit based on various islands
    near New Guinea. He spent most of his tour scouring the hid-
    den bays of remote islands for Japanese ships as the squadron
    island-hopped in advance of General MacArthur. His unit was
    reported to have inflicted more damage to enemy ships, aircraft,
    and ground installations than any other Liberator unit in the re-
    gion. Bulldog was credited with sinking 44 vessels and barges,
    and destroying 17 aircraft on the ground.
          Bob himself was at the controls for the squadron's biggest
    kill, a 10.000 ton tanker caught in a bay in northern Borneo. The
    bomb sight was not functioning correctly, so the Liberator flew in
    at masthead height, scoring two direct hits.
          After the Japanese surrendered, Bob was sent to Australia to
    assist in the decommissioning of allied air bases. Afterward, he
    was assigned to the Philippines, where the Navy put his extraordi-
    nary aviation skills to full advantage as a test pilot. In one incident,
    he managed to land his PB4Y2 Privateer on a flat tire, expertly
    playing with the engine power settings to keep the weight off the
    useless tire until the final few meters. Bob was finally discharged
    in May 1946 with the rank of Lieutenant Junior Grade and with
    numerous commendations for skill and bravery.
110                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
                 Flight Lie ut e nant B ob by E ar l
                  Fr e e b e rg on his graduat ion
                   from flight s chool in 1944.
OFFICIAL SOURCES                          111
         A second package of documents contained an unclassified
    diplomatic dispatch written in August 1978 from the American
    Embassy in Jakarta to the State Department in Washington, DC.
    The cable referred to a report written by Indonesian authorities
    regarding the remains found at the RI-002 crash site in Sumatra.
    In this report, the Indonesians advised their American counter-
    parts that the crash victims had not been separately identifiable,
    and that all of the bone fragments found in the wreckage had
    been buried in Tanjung Karang.
         However, a follow-up cable states that the Freeberg fam-
    ily was contacted about repatriation of Bob's remains. Some-
    one in the family (the name has been excised for, I assume,
    reasons of privacy) replied that they would prefer that Bob re-
    mained buried in Tanjung Karang.
         If he was there at all, that is. Indonesian Air Force documents
    explicitly state that remains recovered from the crash site had been
    stored in six coffins, “one larger than the others” according to an
    observer. The demands of military protocol and the sensitivity of
    Indonesians regarding veterans of the struggle for independence
    would, rightly or wrongly, have prevented a foreigner from being
    interred in such hallowed ground as a heroes cemetery. No grave-
    stone purports to mark the final resting place of Bob Freeberg,
    and no document offers a clue to the fate of the “sixth coffin”.
112                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      11
      NON STOP
      TO JOGJA
      —
      JO G JAKARTA — J AVA
      September 1947
In early September we found a buyer for the quinine and va-
nilla, who took possession and promised payment in 30 days.
With the cargo sold, we were finally free to return to Java,
which we did on 21 September 1947.
      The return flight of RI-002 to Jogjakarta was packed with
medicines and other necessities. The most important, in my opin-
ion, were the boxes of radio equipment that would facilitate
communication between Jogjakarta and other Republican re-
gions, as well as the outside world.
      We also carried a passenger: Captain Ignacio Espina of the
Intelligence Section of the Philippines Army. Pang and I had ar-
ranged for this veteran of the guerrilla resistance to the Japanese
occupation of his country to live in Jogjakarta for an indefinite
period, where he would train our freedom fighters in guerrilla
warfare. We were gratified that both the Indonesian and Philip-
pine governments had approved this arrangement, the first direct
aid the Republic would receive from another sovereign nation.
      Though historic, this mission was also strictly secret, which
posed a significant logistical challenge. Espina's superiors would
not allow us to make the customary refueling stopover in Labuan,
                         NON STOP TO JOGJA                          113
    an island off the east coast of Borneo which, like Singapore, was
    then under British control. Bob decided to attempt a non-stop
    flight to Jogjakarta by installing an extra fuel tank and topping up
    our fuel at Sanga-Sanga in the Sulu archipelago, the southernmost
    airstrip in the Philippines. From friends at Clarke Air Base he se-
    cured a wing tank of a decommissioned C-46 Commando in the
    process of being stripped for parts. We stored this in the passenger
    cabin like an ordinary item of cargo, but with valves and piping
    connecting it to the Dakota's fuel system. Espinas commander ar-
    ranged clearance for an overnight stop at Sanga-Sanga.
          We left Sanga-Sanga shortly after noon. On this schedule, we
    would approach the north coast of Java shortly before sunset. We
    hoped that in the waning light, we would be a scarcely discern-
    able speck amid the riotous colors of a tropical twilight. But in the
    tropics, dark night falls within minutes of sundown. We would be
    flying blind on our last leg, so Bob was relying on my familiarity
    with the terrain to find Maguwo in the fading light.
          Flying over the island of Borneo for the first time in daylight, I
    felt a twinge of anxiety. The forest canopy stretched, an unbroken
    green carpet, from horizon to horizon. Were we to fall into the sea,
    at least an oil slick might mark our graves. But if we were to plunge
    into this forest, it would swallow us whole, perhaps for eternity.
          I knew this land to be as valuable as it was beautiful. Untold
    oil wealth, just beginning to be tapped before the war, could be
    extracted and exported to fund the building of our new nation.
    The Dutch would spare no effort to maintain their hold on this
    great natural treasure. It was our task to ensure that the riches
    of Borneo and the other islands would be used for the benefit of
    Indonesians, not siphoned off to Europe.
          I was yanked from my reverie when the engines suddenly
    started to cough, and the aircraft lurched as we lost power. My
    vague fears of crashing into the forest were suddenly very real. We
114                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
had been running on the fuel stored in the extra tank in the cabin,
sensibly draining those hundreds of gallons of highly volatile avia-
tion gasoline sloshing around the rusty tank as early in the flight
as possible. Bob switched over to the Dakota's regular fuel system
and the engines resumed their reassuring drone. But the look of
surprise and concern on Bob's face told me that the tank had emp-
tied sooner than he had estimated, perhaps because of a headwind.
With no landmarks visible we could only plot our current position
to within a few hundred kilometers, and hope that the fuel in the
main tanks would be sufficient to reach our destination.
      I turned back to the window and the featureless landscape
below, and thought about the reasons my colleagues and I were
taking such risks. Boedi, Pang, and I had joined the military to
fight for the freedom of all Indonesians. If that goal required us to
sacrifice our lives, so be it. Espina was on board because he was a
professional soldier following orders.
      That left our captain. If his motives were wholly mercenary,
during the week when the quinine was unsold he would have
simply left us stranded in Manila and flown off to find more
profitable charters. That he had not abandoned us spoke to his
character and his vision. As the first foreign pilot to throw in
his lot with Indonesia, Bob could expect a lucrative future as
an aviation-services contractor with contacts at the highest lev-
els of an independent Indonesia.
      But I had met enough members of the Aviation Brotherhood
during these past months to know that many were motivated by
the thrill of danger. If Bob was flying back to Java in search of
adventure, we might be betting the fate of our nation on a hired
gun who, at any time, might fly off in search of new thrills. I re-
garded the unbroken rain forest canopy far below us, now blazing
emerald in the westering sun, and brooded on the future, a future
that depended on aviators like Bob Freeberg.
                          NON STOP TO JOGJA                           115
          The Netherlands East Indies had already played a significant
    role in aviation history. The colonial army had maintained an
    air corps since 1915, and before the war the Amsterdam-Batavia
    route operated by Dutch national carrier KLM had been the lon-
    gest commercial service in the world. In 1934, when I was in my
    third year of junior high school in Madiun, the Netherlands East
    Indies leaped to global attention when Batavia was chosen as a
    staging point in the London-to-Melbourne race; the first aviation
    rally to span half the globe. Like a boy of a later generation who
    would amass an encyclopedic knowledge of the effort to land a
    man on the moon, I tracked the daily progress of the race and
    memorized every scrap of information about the participants
    and machines. My father berated me for wasting time and ef-
    fort learning this “useless knowledge”, so I restricted my studies
    to when I was alone in my room.
          However, this “useless knowledge” paid off when I stood
    for my final exam in junior high school. I had been ill for an
    entire month that semester, returning to class only three weeks
    before the examination. Everyone, including my father, expected
    me to flunk out. I was saved by one exercise in the geography sec-
    tion: map out a journey from Amsterdam to Batavia. While my
    classmates mapped the sea journey, I concocted a flight itinerary
    based on the London-to-Melbourne route: something even the
    examination committee had not expected. With all those airfield
    names fresh in my memory, I just jotted them down in reverse
    sequence, earning a perfect score in geography and raising my
    overall grade to just over the pass mark.
         As we crossed the Java Sea and approached the north coast
    of the island of Java, I would again put this knowledge to use.
    Now, however, the stakes were much higher: our lives, not school
    grades, were on the line. With the fuel level dangerously low, it
    was up to me to get us to Jogjakarta by the shortest possible route.
116                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
     The sun had set more than an hour before. I could barely
discern the outlines of Mount Muria on the coast to our right.
But I saw no indication of Mount Merapi, the active volcano that
stands over Jogjakarta which I had hoped would guide us straight
to Maguwo. I told Bob to head directly south, hoping that Merapi
might somehow appear in the gloom.
     We were at about eight thousand feet, flying almost blind,
when I saw dim lights in the distance directly ahead of us. I
guessed from the grid-like pattern of lights that I was looking
at a town large enough to have electric lighting. If we were on
the correct course, the town would be Klaten, thirty kilometers
northeast of Jogjakarta. But in the darkness, with no other land-
marks visible, I could not be sure.
      Bob was visibly impatient. Nevertheless, I kept my si-
lence, wanting to make a positive identification of the land-
mark. But Bob could wait no longer.
     “Come on, Muharto,” he snapped. “It's your country.
You should know where we are!”
      I peered at the landscape below, visible only as vague out-
lines in the wan light of the crescent moon. I saw silhouettes of
a line of uniform rounded mounds. I had never flown over the
area, but the formation looked familiar. Then I remembered a
plate in the Dutch Bos atlas we used in primary school, which
had a drawing of similar hills rising from the limestone coast-
al plateau south of Jogjakarta. In the atlas they were called the
Duizend Gebergte, Thousand Mountains. My classmates (at least
the boys and always with a snigger) referred to the formation
by the local idiom that precisely describes the shape of the hills:
Susu Seribu, A Thousand Breasts.
     With full confidence, I told Bob:
     “Turn west and watch the hills below. As soon as you
reach the end, turn due north.”
                        NON STOP TO JOGJA                           117
          Bob followed my directions, and minutes later we saw
    the lights of Jogjakarta. But as we flew over the sultan's pal-
    ace the entire city blacked out. This was understandable: we
    had arrived completely unannounced. We learned later that we
    had set off two air-raid sirens.
         A half-dozen torch lights beamed upward from various
    points in the city. These were fifth-column members signaling
    what they believed to be a Dutch fighter or bomber. In the close
    quarters of Jogjakarta's neighborhoods, this was perilous indeed.
    One brief flash of light spotted by a neighbor would bring the
    entire community to the traitor's door, with terrible consequences.
          I pointed in the presumed direction of Maguwo airstrip
    while Bobby dropped his landing gear and played with the pro-
    peller pitch controls to produce the undulating “friendly aircraft”
    sound signature. After tense moments, the airport lights blazed
    on, and Bobby landed with only a few liters of fuel left in the tank.
         “Never again,” said our captain, as he powered down
    the twin engines of his Dakota.
118                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
       12
       AN ESSENTIAL
       LIFELINE
       —
       JO G JAKARTA — B AN GKOK
       September – October 1947
“My name's Bob Freeberg. I'm an American. I'm a pilot and I sym-
 pathize with your struggle. How can I help?”
      This is how President Soekarno remembered the first words
 spoken to him by Bob Freeberg. In an interview with American
 journalist Cindy Adams, Soekarno told of the day Bob had sud-
 denly appeared in his office at the presidential palace in Jogjakarta.
Though the interview took place almost two decades afterward,
 Soekarno still spoke fondly of the “dear boy” who had “appeared
 out of nowhere” but would go on to play such an important role
 in the nation’s struggle for freedom.
       Soekarno's outstanding rhetorical gifts included a propensity to
 embellish stories, so most of his personal reminiscences should be tak-
 en with a grain of salt. I have a different recollection of the encounter.
The day after our arrival in Jogjakarta, we had a lengthy meeting with
 Suryadarma, then I took Bob on a walking tour of Jogjakarta.
      When we passed the imposing colonial edifice which served
 as Soekarno’s residence and the de facto presidential palace, I
 suggested we look inside.
      “Sure,” Bob said, in obvious jest. “Let’s say hi to
 President Soekarno.”
                         AN ESSENTIAL LIFELINE                              119
          I was acquainted with a few palace staff members from my days
    as army liaison officer. Some name dropping at the gate, along with
    my officer’s uniform and a foreigner in tow, gained us entry. Proto-
    col was the least of our concerns during those difficult days, and few
    foreigners visited Jogjakarta. A staffer of my acquaintance spotted us
    in the lobby, and, of course, wanted to know more about my com-
    panion. When I explained Bob’s role as a blockade runner, the staffer
    immediately offered to escort us directly to Soekarno's office.
          Born and raised in rural Kansas, Bob was understandably
    nonplussed when his joking comment about meeting Soekarno
    suddenly became reality. I remember that he simply mumbled his
    name, looking uncomfortable, as he shook Soekarno’s hand. For-
    tunately, in private conversation Soekarno treated everyone as an
    equal, regardless of position or background. Soekarno invited us
    to sit, and then asked Bob some personal questions: his age and
    marital status. Americans regard these subjects as private matters
    not to be shared with strangers, but we believe that they are suit-
    able conversation openers. To be sure, Soekarno also questioned
    Bob about his aviation qualifications and experience, and was
    quite satisfied with the replies.
          Soekarno expressed his fervent hope that Bob would be
    able to maintain an essential line of communication between our
    struggling republic and the outside world. If the Dutch were to
    succeed in isolating us behind their blockade, he said, our former
    colonial masters might yet strangle our new nation at birth.
          Bob would do exactly that. For the next year, Bob and RI-
    002 served as a lifeline for the Republic. Because RI-002 was con-
    sidered an official Indonesian Air Force asset (albeit a rental), I
    accompanied each flight as the mission leader, usually taking the
    right-hand seat in the cockpit as the (thoroughly unqualified) co-
    pilot. Nevertheless, my position was of nominal authority only:
    Captain Freeberg always had the final say.
120                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Most of this work was simple freighting; performing the
mundane functions normally the domain of commercial shippers.
Many flights were wholly internal, shifting personnel and mate-
rial from one Republican enclave to another. On our international
flights, RI-002 would fly just about every conceivable cargo. Spare
machinery parts, automobile tires, radio equipment, mail, books,
and medicines were usual imports, while on outbound flights Bob
carried high-value plantation produce such as our original cargo
of quinine and vanilla, rubber and spices, along with gem stones
and other valuables to be sold, in open markets or through shady
backroom deals, in Manila, Singapore, or Bangkok.
      Some missions, however, were wholly military by design. On
17 October 1947, RI-002 flew ten paratroopers into the rain for-
est at the southern end of the island of Borneo. The governor of
the region was beleaguered by pro-Dutch insurgents, evidently
trained guerrilla fighters, who would raid settlements, then disap-
pear without a trace into the dense rain forests. We hoped that our
own commandos would beat them at their own game.
      I watched the paratroopers being trained in the week before
the mission. I did not envy them. For most, if not all, this would
be their first time in an airplane. Yet, they were expected to jump
out of it and land in the midst of a remote forest. Their training
would last only a few days; barely sufficient to learn to pack their
parachutes and to land without breaking their legs.
      Nevertheless, all were in high spirits as they boarded RI-002.
But as the Dakota approached the drop zone, one trooper suf-
fered a last-minute failure of nerve. He intentionally pulled the
rip cord on his parachute while still in the airplane, rendering
him unable to jump. I do not know what fate awaited him back
at base for his cowardice, but it could not have been worse than
that of his nine comrades-in-arms. After only a month of opera-
tions all would be tracked down and either killed or captured by
                        AN ESSENTIAL LIFELINE                        121
    Dutch forces. But the mission is still remembered as the Indone-
    sian army's first modern-style commando infiltration, commemo-
    rated by a full-scale replica RI-002 in a park on the outskirts of
    Pangkalan Bun, Central Kalimantan.
         A few days afterward, Bob made a similar paratrooper drop
    over Madura, a large island lying east of Surabaya. On this oc-
    casion, we dropped only two men, but also several bundles, in-
    cluding bales of rice, money, and sten guns. Bob would soon be
    defamed as a gunrunner, but in this case he failed at that task: the
    parachute on the bundle containing the arms and ammunition
    failed to open and the guns were smashed to pieces on impact.
    But the food and money was put to great use and helped to keep
    Republican sentiment alive among the fierce Madurese.
          Our flight back out of Indonesia after our return from Ma-
    nila might well have been our last. In late October Suryadarma
    ordered Bob to fly two of our senior aviators, Halim Perdanaku-
    suma and Iswahyudi, to Bangkok. Both pilots were graduates of
    the Dutch colonial military academy. Halim had been training
    with the Royal Canadian Air Force in Britain when the Japanese
    invaded the Netherlands East Indies. Consequently, he was in-
    ducted into the European war, flying 44 missions with the allies.
    Iswahyudi had been evacuated to Australia along with other co-
    lonial military officers, making his own way back (reportedly in a
    rubber raft!) immediately after the war ended.
          Suryadarma had ordered them to purchase and fly back the
    second fully serviceable aircraft in our fleet: RI-003. An Australian
    pilot had offered to sell his Avro-Anson two-engine aircraft to the
    Republic at a favorable price: fifteen kilograms of gold. This was
    yet another example of the support given by our neighbors to the
    south. Muhammad Hatta had easily raised the required amount
    from donors in Sumatra. Halim and Iswahyudi would deliver the
    gold, take possession of the Avro-Anson, and fly it to Bukittinggi.
122                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
                               Parat roop e rs b oarding
                        R I- 002 for t he firs t m ilit ar y
                      infilt rat ion act ion int o Dut ch-
                             cont rolle d K alim ant an in
                                          O ct ob e r 1947.
AN ESSENTIAL LIFELINE                            123
           On our arrival in Bangkok we were detained by authori-
     ties unsure of the “RI” registration. The Dutch Legation to Siam
     (Thailand briefly reverted to the old name of their nation follow-
     ing the war) pressured the government to confiscate RI-002 as an
     illegal blockade runner. But the Siamese, who had neither been
     colonized by Europeans nor formally occupied by the Japanese,
     seldom entertained the demands of a foreign power if their own
     interests were not affected. The Siamese authorities placed Bob in
     comfortable detention in a business hotel while they considered
     their options. The Indonesian crew, on the other hand, were left
     to our own devices, and had to find our own accommodation in
     the less-salubrious quarters of that rowdy town.
           A few days later, to the dismay of the Dutch, the Siamese
     declared the Dakota to be legally registered with a legitimate
     aviation organization–a significant symbolic victory for the Re-
     public of Indonesia. Bob was released to go about his business,
     in the process attracting considerable attention from the local
     press. One lengthy profile appeared under the catchy headline:
    “Indonesia's One Man Air Force”.
           In a sense, this romantic epithet was correct. The Republic
     of Indonesia was at war. Any action that benefited the Republic,
     from attacking Dutch outposts to growing crops to feed Jogja-
     karta’s booming population of refugees, was explicitly hostile to
     Dutch interests. Every flight of RI-002 was an act of war that
     strengthened the Republic and weakened the Dutch. Without ever
     firing a weapon, Bob Freeberg had become one of the most effec-
     tive assets of the Republican military arsenal.
           While he was never reckless, the demands of the job, and the
     need to keep our distance from possible Dutch patrols, meant that
     Bob would take calculated risks, particularly during flights carry-
     ing only cargo. On one such occasion, with only Bob, Boedi, and
     myself on board, our flight path was blocked by towering thun-
124                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
derclouds. I suggested we take a roundabout route that would
add at least an hour to the flight time. Bob rejected that idea, as it
would drop fuel reserves to a dangerous minimum. He asked me
to indicate the positions of nearby mountains.
      My charts, and my knowledge of Java's geography, indi-
cated that the only route where we did not risk a “controlled
flight into terrain” ran directly through the black thunderheads.
It was now my turn to object, insisting that the possibility of run-
ning out of fuel before reaching Jogjakarta posed a lesser risk
than flying through a violent tropical storm. Bob ignored the in-
creasingly strident protests of his “copilot” and pointed the Da-
kota directly into the maelstrom.
      Moments later we were engulfed in a dark gray blanket
of cloud, and were dazzled by flashes of lightning. The Dakota
shuddered and creaked in the turbulence, with sickening plunges
followed by painfully slow climbs to regain lost altitude. I was
terrified, but Bob looked no different than he did when cruising
through clear skies, though his eyes flicked constantly over the
flight instruments and he kept an unusually firm grip on the con-
trols. Seeing I was in distress, Bob shouted:
     “Don't fret, Muharto. This is nothing. After the war I used to
run test flights into typhoons!”
                        AN ESSENTIAL LIFELINE                          125
          13
          BOB
          THE BEST
          —
          JO G JAKA RTA — MAN I LA
          October 1947
    “Bring back some buntil!” Bob shouted from the open cockpit
     window to Boedi, who had jumped from the Dakota as soon as
     Bob had powered down. Boedi was running to catch the train
     into Jogjakarta and then a bus to his home village near the town
     of Magelang, where he would take a short leave. Bob was refer-
     ring to a steamed delicacy prepared from ground fish and vegeta-
     bles wrapped in papaya leaves. Boedi's mother made a delicious
     buntil, which Bob would devour, fiery sambal and all.
          This was typical of our American captain. Bob demanded
     no special treatment from his hosts, for whom every waking mo-
     ment was an exhausting struggle to survive. On many missions
     we would have to spend a night on an isolated airstrip, with no
     accommodation available. On these occasions, Captain Freeberg
     forswore even trivial creature comforts, curling up on the wing
     with a tattered blanket so his crew might make themselves mar-
     ginally more comfortable in the cabin.
          When in Jogjakarta, Bob stayed in the room we provided for
     him in the Hotel Merdeka. Built in 1911 to accommodate guests
     of the Dutch military, the Grand Hotel De Djokdja was renovated
     and expanded over the decades, by the late 1930s taking pride of
126                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
place as the premiere hotel in Jogjakarta and the center of colo-
nial society. During the three-year Japanese occupation, the hotel
was renamed the Hotel Asahi and used as military headquarters.
In 1946, when the Republican government relocated to Jogjakar-
ta, the hotel was re-named the Hotel Merdeka, and many rooms
were used as makeshift offices by senior government officials.
      Despite the illustrious history and opulent furnishings,
conditions inside the Hotel Merdeka were not a great improve-
ment over those in isolated airstrips. The wartime occupa-
tion and post-war blockade had taken a toll. Paint was peeling,
sheets were threadbare, and the once-fine kitchen could serve
only simple dishes of rice, tempe (a type of fried soybean cake),
and sambal, the fiery sauce of chilies, garlic, and onion that ac-
companies all Indonesian dishes.
      The Hotel Merdeka was the preferred accommodation for
the few foreigners who visited Jogjakarta. Bob was soon joined
by the representatives of the United Nations Committee of Good
Offices (GOC), whose task was to investigate conditions in the
Republic. With Suryadarma’s tacit consent, Bob flew the GOC
officers on a tour of Republican-controlled areas. Thanks to Bob,
the officials could witness for themselves our success in build-
ing a functioning society with minimal resources and in the
most difficult of circumstances.
      Bob told me that the officials had been profoundly im-
pressed by the passion and commitment of the common Indo-
nesians they encountered in their journey. However, Bob himself
was not impressed by the behavior of the officials when they
returned to Jogjakarta. Bob had often complained to me about
the American diplomats in Manila. Before we introduced him to
Senator Pendatun, Bob had experienced great difficulty bringing
his dispute with Bob Walters before the courts. He felt that the
staff at the American embassy should have assisted him in deal-
                           BOB THE BEST                            127
    ing with this foreign legal system, but had been too concerned
    with their social standing and the perks of diplomatic life to focus
    on assisting their compatriots.
          Bob regarded the GOC officials in the same light. I thought
    this unfair. By all accounts the commission representatives were
    conscientious and observant. However, one incident did sug-
    gest that Bob might have a point.
          One evening, I invited Bob to join me for dinner at a food
    stall near the Hotel Merdeka. The owner had just received a ship-
    ment of salted duck eggs from his home village. This would be a
    memorable treat for the residents of blockaded Jogjakarta, who
    regarded ourselves as fortunate if able to eat one chicken egg
    a week. We arrived at the stall to see a dozen people crowding
    around, watching patiently while the stall owner carefully sliced
    each egg into many pieces, giving a single sliver to each diner to
    be savored with their meal of rice, soy cake, and chili.
          Afterward, Bob invited me back to the hotel for coffee. The
    few guests in the dining room were eating meals no more elaborate
    than those served in the food stall we had just left. We were halfway
    through our coffee when the GOC officials arrived. We watched
    the waiters bring out steaming plates of corned beef, potatoes, and
    other items the officials had brought with them. The other diners,
    which included senior government officials, regarded them briefly,
    then turned back to their own Spartan meals. One of the officials
    spotted Bob and nodded in recognition. Bob nodded back, then
    turned to me, his face set in an expression of open disapproval.
          I think Bob might have been somewhat unfair in his harsh
    judgment of the GOC officers. I later learned that the American
    delegate had openly praised the courage, resourcefulness, and
    resilience of the Indonesians he encountered during his expedi-
    tions and in Jogjakarta itself. On the other hand, Bob never once
    ventured any opinions about our revolution, though the many
128                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
financial and other sacrifices he made without complaint during
sixteen months of flying for the Republic spoke volumes. How-
ever, he did voice his feelings in copious correspondence with his
family in Kansas. During spare moments, often in the cockpit of
RI-002 during layovers, Bob would draft long letters to his par-
ents and siblings. I must confess that on one occasion, curiosity
got the better of me when I spotted a letter lying face up on the
RI-002 radio console as I searched for the log book. Assuming
that Bob would not leave a letter containing intensely personal
content lying around, I stole a sideways glance and read:
     “...the Dutch are saying one thing and doing another. They
are still trying to keep the Indonesian people conquered but I
think it impossible for the Dutch to ever again do that. The peo-
ple are all very strongly united against the Dutch and everywhere
you go people shout their slogan of “Merdeka!” The people are
poor and haven't proper clothing, transportation or weapons to
wage a war, but they will stand to the last man against the Dutch.
It is pretty wonderful to see a people believe in the freedom we
Americans enjoy and are ready to fight for the achievement of this
view. I for one believe that the Dutch should be stopped, because
they are still using the policies of oppression toward the people of
Indonesia. Apparently they had forgotten how bitterly they hated
being the subjects of Nazis...”
      Bob’s innate reluctance to openly praise our revolution was
mirrored in our own conduct. In those times of dire struggle, no
one expressed gratitude for another person’s efforts in the fight
for freedom, no matter how arduous or even heroic. It was our
way of acknowledging that everyone was expected to contrib-
ute whatever was necessary without thought of reward or rec-
ognition. Thus, no one (except Soekarno) openly thanked Bob
for his contribution. However, we were often able to demon-
strate our gratitude in other ways.
                             BOB THE BEST                            129
Su d j a n a Ke r t o n’s
i m p r e s s i o n o f t he Ng a sem
m ar ke t i n J o g ja k a r t a
du r i n g t h e b l o ck a d e.
        130                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
       Shortly after the GOC officials had left Jogjakarta, I met Bob at
the Hotel Merdeka for dinner. As usual, the dining room was filled
with senior civilian and military officials. They were curious about
the American who was making such a valuable contribution to our
struggle, and all eyes followed Bob as he entered the dining room.
      We sat at an empty table and I signaled to a waiter, who I
knew to be the senior staff member of the dining room, to bring
us both the same meal as the other diners, on the assumption that
food fit for a government minister or army general would be good
enough for a junior officer and a cargo-airplane pilot. A few min-
utes afterward another waiter appeared, carrying a single plate of
rice and soy cake, which he set in front of me. Bob and I regarded
each other with bemusement, wondering why the waiter did not
bring two plates at once. Then, the senior waiter, his dignity undi-
minished by his stained and frayed waistcoat, approached our ta-
ble carrying a gleaming silver-service tray. With a graceful flourish,
the waiter set the tray on the table in front of Bob and whipped
off the cover, revealing steaming slices of freshly fried corned beef,
the contents of the single can left behind by the GOC officials.
       Bob was mortified, and motioned for the waiter to take the
plate away and distribute the corned beef to other diners. But the
waiter would not hear of it. He mildly berated Bob in Javanese, in
the tone of an affectionate parent to a child refusing a meal. Bob
looked to me for a translation. I smiled and said:
      “You need to keep up your strength to fly that big air-
plane. We are all counting on you.”
      At the end of October, initial missions completed, Bob re-
turned to Manila. His passengers on this flight were several Re-
publican officials tasked with preparing for participation in our
first international conference.
       The United Nations Security Council had taken note of the
positive impressions gathered by the GOC officials Bob had flown
                             BOB THE BEST                                131
    around Republican regions. The officials had informally com-
    mented that the areas under our control were peaceful and secure,
    though we struggled to acquire even the basic necessities of survival.
          The Security Council therefore decided to hear our side of the
    story directly by inviting a delegation of Republican officials and aca-
    demics to a conference scheduled for the first two weeks of December
    in Baguio, a pleasant town in the highlands north of Manila. The
    conference was conducted by the United Nations Economic Commis-
    sion for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE), which had been established
    in early 1947 to foster economic cooperation among the new na-
    tions of East Asia. The Security Council decided that the commission
    members would be in the best position to evaluate our claims that the
    Republic of Indonesia was (or had the potential to become) a viable
    political and economic entity.
          This would be our best and perhaps only opportunity to
    show the world that the Republic of Indonesia, if given the op-
    portunity, commanded the physical and social resources required
    to build and maintain a just and prosperous sovereign state. And
    we could not have availed ourselves of that opportunity without
    the invaluable assistance of Bob Freeberg.
132                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      14
      MUSEUM OF
      MEMORIES
      —
      JO G JAKARTA
      April 1993
Jogjakarta holds a special place in my heart. Each visit to this
historic town in the heartland of Java rekindles memories of my
days as a dashing blockade runner and, of course, of meeting and
marrying my beloved wife, Ani.
      In 1993, I had a special reason to hop on the Jogja-bound
train. An article in Angkasa, the internal magazine of the Indo-
nesian Air Force, reported that an abandoned sugar-cane pro-
cessing factory, now part of the expanded Adisucipto air base,
had been converted into a military aviation museum. The article
further stated that all memorabilia and relics relating to Indo-
nesian military aviation history had been relocated to the new
facility for permanent storage. There I might find the remain-
ing physical evidence of RI-002.
      These historic artifacts had found a suitable home. Jogja-
karta is the living symbol of our struggle for self-determination.
The modern town was founded in 1756 on the site of an ancient
imperial capital as a protest against Dutch interference in Java-
nese politics by Mangkubumi, a charismatic uncle of the weak
and indecisive ruler of the Mataram kingdom, which encom-
passed much of the heartland of Java. Mangkubumi believed that
his nephew had become little more than a puppet of the Dutch,
                      MUSEUM OF MEMORIES                           133
    who then controlled the VOC trading ports of Java’s north coast.
    Mangkubumi led his fellow disaffected nobles in a series of rebel-
    lions that humiliated the feckless young monarch. To restore peace
    to the region, the Dutch suggested the division of Mataram into
    two kingdoms: one ruled by the existing monarch, the other by
    Mangkubumi, now Sultan Hamengkubuono, from a new palace
    in a town he named Jogjakarta.
          For the next one hundred and fifty years, Jogjakarta main-
    tained a fierce spirit of independence, even as the Dutch exerted
    increasing control over practical affairs, relegating the sultan to fig-
    urehead status. That all changed in 1939, when the designated heir
    to the throne, Dorojatun, returned from his university studies in
    the Netherlands to succeed his deceased father. When the Japanese
    occupied the town three years later, the people of Jogjakarta looked
    to the revered ninth Hamengkubuono for leadership and resilience.
          After the Japanese occupation forces left the city to await
    repatriation in August 1945, the sultan took control. Six months
    later, the sultan invited the Republican government to relocate
    to Jogjakarta, a bold measure that secured the visionary, Dutch-
    educated sultan an exalted position in the pantheon of Indonesian
    national heroes. President Soekarno and his ministers set up of-
    fices in the imposing neoclassical public buildings vacated by the
    Dutch, though that grandeur was not reflected in the near-rags
    they wore and simple meals of rice and soy cake they ate.
          Sultan Hamengkubuono IX frequently emerged from his
    palace, dressed for action in military fatigues, to give impromp-
    tu street-corner speeches calling on his subjects to support the
    Republican government in any way possible. As thousands of
    young Republicans from Java and other islands sought refuge in
    the new capital, the sultan opened the gates of his royal fortress,
    setting aside large areas for use as a university, the first step in
    developing the corps of managers and technicians the new nation
    would require to survive and grow.
134                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      A half-century on, Jogjakarta remains defined by this focus
on education. The tranquil environment, inexpensive cost of liv-
ing, and general atmosphere of intellectual freedom attracts stu-
dents from throughout the archipelago, the region, and the world.
       Nevertheless Jogjakarta remains, in many respects, a tradi-
tional heartland Javanese community. In neighborhoods redo-
lent with the fragrance of the melted wax used for making ba-
tik, the Jogjanese practice age-old forms of ritual and ceremony
little changed from the days when their sultan held real power of
life and death over his subjects.
       Many of these customs reflect the mysticism that pervades
Java. We consider the unseen world of spirits and uncanny forc-
es to be as real as the ground beneath our feet. In recent years
I have become fascinated by these spiritual practices, and their
applications in the physical world. Though my wife makes no
secret of her disapproval of this “waste of time”, I use every vis-
it to Jogjakarta as an opportunity to confer with one or more
masters of Javanese mysticism.
       The Jogjanese believe that Mount Merapi, the active volcano
towering over the city to the north, is a gateway to the spirit world.
On this occasion, I awoke well before dawn and drove along a bat-
tered mountain road to a village high on the slopes to confer with
the gatekeeper of the holy mountain. This venerated palace servant
led me on a strenuous climb to a shrine above his village, where
we meditated as the mountain vented steam into the sky over our
heads. I then drove back to Jogjakarta, presenting myself at the
guard post of Adisucipto air base shortly before noon.
       This was my first visit to the airfield after resigning my com-
mission thirty-five years before. I signed in, giving my full name
and rank, then walked along tranquil, tree-shaded avenues, the
silence occasionally broken by the drone of turboprop training
                       MUSEUM OF MEMORIES                              135
    craft. I passed the trim bungalows lining the street, identifying
    the location of the office where, a half-century in the past, I had
    piloted a desk and dreamed of gaining my wings.
         Eventually, my wandering ended at the museum. The facility is
    primarily an educational tool; I was engulfed by throngs of elemen-
    tary school children as I toured the exhibits: uniforms, flight instru-
    ments, and other memorabilia opening the floodgates of memory.
         The most vivid memory was evoked by a replica of the fast-
    est and most agile of our hand-me-down fleet, the Nishikoren
    two-seater monoplane that ferried Bob and me from Tasikmalaya
    to Jogjakarta on that brilliant June morning. I climbed onto the
    wing, looked down into the open passenger cockpit and remem-
    bered Bob and me squeezed into a space barely large enough for
    a short, slight Japanese airman.
          I also remembered fretting that only the pilot wore a para-
    chute. Each flight in one of our refurbished Japanese aircraft
    carried a high risk of dropping out of the sky because of the
    sudden failure of a component previously certified airworthy.
    Our skilled, dedicated mechanics relied only on visual inspec-
    tion and educated guesswork even when inspecting such criti-
    cal components as fuel pumps. The technical logs, the “story” of
    the aircraft, which list the maintenance history of each compo-
    nent, were all written in Japanese!
         The inherent unreliability of the Japanese aircraft encour-
    aged two Air Force officers to strive for excellence. Wiweko So-
    epono, who would later build flagship carrier Garuda Indonesia
    into a world-class commercial airline, and Nurtanio Pringgoadi-
    surjo, who founded Indonesia's first aircraft manufacturer, built
    serviceable light aircraft almost from scratch.
         The Dutch blockade had eliminated any possibility of import-
    ing manufactured aviation components. Instead, they cannibalized
    parts of the Japanese wrecks and whatever else they could scrounge,
    including carving and polishing wooden propellers by hand.
136                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
       Their crowning effort, exhibited to bemused visitors in the
 museum, was a strange fusion of hang glider and motorcycle in-
 tended for use as an observation aircraft. But this ungainly “micro-
 light” actually flew, marking the high point of our “home industry”.
       While the aviation museum claimed to represent a compre-
 hensive history of the Air Force, I could find no indication of
 RI-002, save the distant outline of Bob's Dakota in the diorama
 depicting commandos parachuting into a Borneo rain forest. So
 I left the public area and found the office of the curator, where
 I identified myself as former copilot of RI-002 and asked about
 the artifacts recovered from the crash site. The curator had some
 slight knowledge of the story of RI-002, but was unsure as to
 whether any artifacts from the wreckage had made their way into
 the museum. He invited me to join him for lunch in the canteen
 while staff members searched the storage rooms.
       We returned to his office an hour afterward to find a small
 cardboard box on the coffee table. The curator opened the box,
 which contained some photographs, two rusted hand guns, and a
 dynamo. I looked first at the photographs, which showed the wreck-
 age strewn around the crash site, and a wing with the barely legible
“RI” markings. One photograph was of men sitting in an open-sided
 field tent. I assumed that the tall, mustached figure standing among
 them was Flight Lieutenant Sulaeman, who had led the expedition
 but had inexplicably refused to answer my letters of inquiry.
       I then picked up the dynamo, which I assumed to have been
 a spare, since it was in pristine condition. My heart skipped as, for
 the first time, I touched a direct physical link with the mystery of
 RI-002. This may well have been the second time I had handled
 this particular item. Bob had insisted that I help him perform
 routine maintenance work. This farm boy believed that a pilot,
 like a soldier with his rifle, should be thoroughly familiar with the
 equipment on which his life depended.
                         MUSEUM OF MEMORIES                            137
          As described by Sulaeman in his report, a 7.62 caliber bullet was
    embedded in the winding. I peered closer, and realized that the bullet
    was, in fact, not embedded, but only wedged between the rotor and
    the rectifier. But the Bakelite wafer was not shattered or even cracked,
    while the wires on the winding showed no evidence of having ab-
    sorbed the energy of a speeding bullet. The bullet itself showed none
    of the deformation one would expect from punching through a metal
    fuselage. It was as though the bullet had been placed there by hand.
          I stared at the dynamo in my hand, puzzling over the anomaly,
    and what it might mean. Then the curators' office seemed to fade
    and I felt myself, somehow, in the crew cabin of RI-002. However,
    I was not in the copilot seat, which I seldom left during a flight, but
    near the radio cubicle just forward of the passenger cabin, where
    the spare dynamo would have been stowed. Suddenly, the aircraft
    made a sickening plunge, and I heard excited voices from the pas-
    senger cabin. The aircraft lurched, and the engines, at full power,
    screamed in protest. I had never experienced such violent maneu-
    vers during my hundreds of hours in Bob's Dakota. The aircraft
    shuddered again, screams now coming from both fore and aft,
    and the deck tilted to a sickening angle as the Dakota went into a
    full-power stall. I heard a loud crash as the fuselage disintegrated
    around me, and I was again sitting on the couch in the museum, the
    curator regarding me with a quizzical expression.
          Profoundly shaken by the experience, I returned the dynamo
    to the box and stood up. Pleading a prior commitment, I thanked
    the curator for his time and walked out of his office and the mu-
    seum. I could not comprehend the meaning of my experience,
    whether it had been a spiritual vision, or simply a fainting fit set
    off by the stress of an exhausting morning. But I did know that
    my investigation into the RI-002 mystery would no longer be sim-
    ply a hobby to pass my retirement years. From that day, my quest
    to determine the fate of my friend would consume my entire life.
138                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
                   The w r e ck age of R I- 002
MUSEUM OF MEMORIES                   139
         15
          A MATTER
          BETWEEN STATES
         —
         JAKARTA
         April 1993
    After the incident in the Aviation Museum, I continued
    my researches with renewed vigor. A few months later I
    tracked down Hadi Santoso, the son of the reserve copi-
    lot on the last flight of RI-002.
         When the presumed remains of his father were discovered
    in April 1978, Hadi traveled to Tanjung Karang to seek further
    information. There, he was shown six coffins, one larger than the
    others, but was not allowed to examine the contents. However,
    when the escorting officer left the room, a sympathetic guard
    showed Hadi a necklace that had been found in the cockpit. Hadi
    confirmed that it was the necklace his father had always worn.
    He asked the guard for more information, and was told that the
    necklace had been discovered during the second investigation,
    when a larger team had been able to spend some days at the site,
    unearthing the buried cockpit and other sections of the aircraft.
    The necklace had been found wrapped around a skull laying on
    the right-hand seat of the cockpit.
         This surprised Hadi, and me. As reserve copilot, Santoso
    would have been sitting with the radio operator or navigator, or
    even in the passenger cabin. This was the first indication that
140                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
Bob might not have been at the controls when RI-002 slammed
into Mount Punggur. I had been well acquainted with Bambang
Saptoadji, and knew that the ambitious young airman jealously
guarded his right to the copilot's seat on the Dakota.
      Moreover, I doubt that Bob would have given the right-hand
seat to Santoso as a training opportunity when flying over remote
and rugged territory in an aircraft carrying a quarter-ton of gold.
Of course, there might be other explanations, even ones so mun-
dane as Bambang coming down with severe intestinal cramps from
a lunch at Branti airstrip (not an uncommon occurrence at roadside
food stalls in tropical Sumatra) that would affect his ability to fly.
      But the story of the necklace reminded me that none of the
documentation of the crash investigation included mention of
Bob's dog tags. Many US Navy veterans, including Bob, wore
their service-issued metal tags around their neck at all times: as
a good-luck charm, a symbol of camaraderie with other military
pilots, and, in line with the gallows humor of professional fliers,
to ensure that their remains are returned to their home towns
after buying the farm in some distant land. If the investigation
teams could have found Santoso's necklace in the right-hand
seat, logically they would have recovered Bob's dog tags from the
left-hand side of the cockpit.
      But without the report of the second investigation team,
this was only guesswork. It is entirely possible that the second
report was simply misplaced. If so, I could have easily overlooked
it, since I had been searching the records on my own, without
any assistance from the archive staff. But the second investiga-
tion team report would prove to be only one of many key docu-
ments to have vanished for unclear reasons. In the next years I
would find that the paper trail generated by the disappearance
of RI-002 was more notable for pieces that were missing than
for documents that were found.
                     A M AT T E R B E T W E E N S TAT E S              141
         This increasingly baffling mystery took another super-
    natural turn when I met Hadi Santoso again, this time with his
    mother, Soenarti. She told me of being invited to Talang Betutu,
    an Air Force base near Palembang. This was in 1977, the year
    before the two farmers stumbled onto the wreckage of RI-002
    on Mount Punggur. At the time, the Air Force was implement-
    ing an extensive renovation of facilities. Bambang Saptoadji had
    been honored by the naming of an officers dormitory at Jakar-
    ta's Halim air base. Now, his fellow aviator Santoso would be
    similarly recognized at Talang Betutu. This was appropriate, as
    Santoso had once commanded the wartime airstrip in nearby Ka-
    rangendah, the field on which Bob and I had made a test land-
    ing during the third CALI flight.
         The Republic did not have the opportunity to make use of
    Karangendah. A few months after our successful test, the base was
    taken by the Dutch during their July 1947 offensive. Santoso led
    his officers and airmen on a strategic retreat to Java. However, the
    cooks, cleaners, and gardeners stayed to continue their jobs under
    the Dutch. Rural Indonesians fortunate to obtain even menial po-
    sitions tended to remain in their job for decades, as they are often
    the primary support of many dependents. After independence, the
    army assumed control of Karangendah to use as the base for an
    armored division. Most of the Karangendah staff were relocated
    to the Air Force facility at Talang Betutu, where some still worked.
          Having, in turn, served the Dutch and the Republic of Indo-
    nesia as fortunes of war ebbed and flowed across the lowlands
    of southern Sumatra, many had fond memories of their former
    commander, who always had had a kind or encouraging word for
    even the most junior subordinate or employee. Those still work-
    ing at Talang Betutu had invited their retired co-workers to the
    ceremony to pay their respects to the widow of their beloved for-
142                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
mer commander. Soenarti was touched, and then profoundly as-
tonished when they told her about their distress at seeing Santoso
confined for several days on the base by the Dutch.
      Soenarti pressed for more information. The men told her
that in late 1948 they had been startled to see a large aircraft land
on the airstrip, which was used only for fighters and other small
airplanes. They were not allowed to approach the craft, which
was guarded around the clock. However, they did identify their
former commander among the passengers and crew when they
were taken from the airplane to a nearby building, where they
would remain under guard for several days. Then, one morning,
both the aircraft and crew were gone.
      Perhaps this shocking news contributed to the fainting at-
tack Soenarti suffered during the ceremony in the sweltering mess
hall a short time afterward. She was brought back to conscious-
ness by a fellow guest claiming to be a dukun, a shaman, who told
her that she had been possessed by the soul of her late husband.
He said that in her delirium she had shouted:
     “The trees! So high! We're going to crash!”
      Haunted by the experience, Soenarti visited several practitio-
ners of the mystic arts, but none could provide more information.
Her vision was confirmed, if that is the word, the following year
when the farmers found the wreckage of RI-002 on Mount Punggur.
      I was fascinated by this information. I offered to help, citing
my own modest ability to contact the unseen world that exists in
parallel with the physical universe. Initially, Soenarti was reluc-
tant to revisit the painful and frustrating experiences with other
mystics. But with the encouragement of her son, she finally agreed.
      Hadi closed the door to the salon so we would not be dis-
turbed by others in the household. I invited Soenarti and Hadi
to join me as I softly intoned the Islamic chants brought to In-
donesia by wandering Sufi clerics centuries ago. While the others
                     A M AT T E R B E T W E E N S TAT E S             143
    continued to chant, I used my training to slip into a meditative
    state and seek guidance in the spirit world. As the room where I
    sat faded from my perception, I attempted to peer back through
    the decades, to the moment I had glimpsed a few months previ-
    ously in the Aviation Museum, when an airplane full of terrified
    souls —a craft where I had spent most of a year and knew almost
    as intimately as my own body—was seconds from destruction.
         Afterward, Hadi escorted me to my automobile. I told him
    that I had failed, that implacable forces were concealing the truth,
    like an enormous wall that I could not scale or go around. Hadi
    said that my experience was similar to that of the other mystic
    practitioners his mother had visited over the years. They had all
    said, in their own words but with the same general meaning:
         “It is very difficult to get the answers, since this
    is a matter between states ...”
144                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
     16
     FLEDGLINGS
     —
     JO G JAKARTA
     October 1947
On mornings when I did not awaken in a hotel room in a foreign
capital (or in the cabin of RI-002 parked on an isolated air strip),
I would take my breakfast of coffee and fried cassava (and, when
available, a single boiled egg) on the terrace of the Hotel Tugu
with some of my fellow officers. It was my favorite time of day, a
chance to relax and trade views with my colleagues before board-
ing the train at the Tugu railway station across the street that
would take us to our duties at Maguwo air base.
     This was the crossroads of Jogjakarta: aircraft on the approach
path to Maguwo droned overhead; gleaming locomotives, manned
from carriage sweeper to engineer by Indonesians, steamed proudly
into the station; lumbering ox carts, driven by barefoot farmers
clad in rough-woven, striped lurik shirts in tatters after years of
continual wear, hauled produce from outlying farms to the Bering-
hardjo market a few hundred meters to the south.
     One morning I shared my sparse breakfast with Bambang
Saptoadji and Moeljono, both recruited and trained by Augustus
Adisucipto in early 1946. Suryadarma had assigned them both to
join RI-002 on the return to Manila a few days hence.
                             FLEDGLINGS                              145
          This would be their first time out of Java: they peppered me
    with questions about what to expect in Manila. As we chatted, we
    heard the distinct drone of a Japanese Curen biplane, and looked
    up. The aircraft banked to circle around the Hotel Merdeka, which
    lay across the railway tracks from the Hotel Tugu. We could clearly
    see Bob in the cockpit. The layout and location near the railway
    station made the Hotel Merdeka readily identifiable from the air.
    Bob was giving the hotel employees a show by circling the hotel
    and wagging his wings. He then banked and headed north toward
    Mount Merapi, the active volcano overlooking the city.
          Though Bambang and Moeljono held Bob in high profession-
    al esteem, they nonetheless chafed at the American pilot's depiction
    in the regional press as “Indonesia's One Man Air Force”. With
    eight pilots (admittedly with barely a hundred hours of flight time
    among them) and a score of airplanes, the Air Force of the Republic
    of Indonesia was, eighteen months after inauguration, in full flight.
          The stirring sight of an Indonesian at the controls of an air-
    craft, a feat once solely the preserve of the Dutch, became a key
    feature of our initial efforts to inspire our people. The Banteng,
    the Curen flown by Augustinus Adisucipto, was regularly spotted
    in the skies over Javanese towns. When the Air Force was estab-
    lished in April 1946, Adisucipto set to work selecting and training
    skilled and intelligent youths such as Bambang and Moeljono to
    provide pilots for all of the serviceable aircraft.
          The recruits learned the rudiments of aviation in Curen
    biplanes, which were, in fact, designed specifically for training.
    Unfortunately, the Curen was an advanced trainer intended to
    be used by experienced pilots to hone their aerial combat skills.
    A fledgling aviator in command of this three-hundred-and-fifty
    horsepower, high-performance machine was in the same po-
    tentially catastrophic position as a driving student behind the
146                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
wheel of a race car. But the cadets defied probability (and per-
haps the laws of aerodynamics) to gain their wings without
suffering any serious accident.
       Scant weeks after their first time at the controls of an air-
plane, Bambang and Moeljono joined Adisucipto and fellow pi-
lots in the skies over Java and Sumatra, astonishing large crowds
with displays of simple aerobatics. In an era when most people
still looked upward at the sound of an airplane, the spectacle of
Indonesians in command of these flying monsters played no small
role in developing our sense of national pride. Our airmen were
regarded as heroic figures, even during the occasional embarrass-
ing displays of inexperience. During one demonstration in Band-
ung, for example, Bambang executed a “ground loop” on landing.
The aircraft spun out of control, damaging a wing and forcing
Bambang to take the train back to Jogjakarta.
       When the Dutch invaded Republican territories on 21 July
1947, bad weather over Jogjakarta prevented their bombers from
destroying our rag-tag fleet on the ground. The following week,
five of our pilots fired up the most serviceable of our decrepit
Japanese cast-offs and flew northward to bomb Dutch military
posts in Semarang and Ambarrawa.
       Moeljono flew the single purpose-built bomber at our dis-
posal, a Mitsubishi Ki-51 Guntai. It was a textbook mission,
dropping 400 kilograms of explosives over a military post outside
of Semarang. On the other hand, the attack on the munitions base
near Ambarrawa in the mountains north of Semarang, was a mar-
vel of improvisation. The “bombardier” sitting in the cockpit of
the Curen simply cradled the small bomb in his lap, then heaved
it over the side at what he considered to be the most suitable mo-
ment. Like the Doolittle Raid on Japan a few months after Pearl
Harbor, which caused negligible damage but unnerved the Japa-
nese commanders while boosting American morale, this surprise
aerial attack delivered a major blow to Dutch complacency.
                             FLEDGLINGS                              147
          For Bambang Saptoadji, however, the Ambarrawa raid was
    only a disappointment. He was assigned as pilot of a powerful
    Hayabusa fighter to be a wing man for the bombers. But the tem-
    peramental engine of his aircraft failed during his take-off run.
    He could only stand on the tarmac and watch his fellow pilots
    vanish into the sky to the north, returning in triumph an hour
    later. He would have to wait for his own opportunity for recogni-
    tion as more than a cocky young flier.
          Bambang never had his chance, as we never again dared to
    attack the Dutch directly by air. Nevertheless, our inexperienced
    pilots and rattletrap aircraft played a decisive role in our struggle.
    With land routes between Republican territories severed by the
    Dutch, the Air Force became the primary means of communica-
    tion and logistical support for far-flung revolutionary strongholds.
    A typical mission would be to re-supply a mountaintop radio out-
    post by flying perilously low to the terrain to drop a drum of
    fuel mounted on the bomb rack of our Guntai bomber. Flying
    without maps, pilots could only navigate by dead reckoning and
    the fortuitous sighting of a distinctive volcano or other prominent
    landmark. One pilot invented his own fail-safe navigation tech-
    nique. If he found himself completely disoriented, he would sim-
    ply swoop low enough to read the signboard of a railway station.
          The arrival of Bob and his Dakota provided a valuable op-
    portunity to train our pilots on larger aircraft, anticipating the
    day when our air force would have its own cargo planes, and
    perhaps even bombers powerful enough to mount major aerial
    raids. Bob proved to be a natural teacher, insisting on perfec-
    tion when necessary, but ignoring trivial issues to concentrate
    on refining essential skills. For example, he told me of one
    copilot who would bank the plane to the right when leaning
    over to check his landing gear.
148                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      “Did you correct him?” I asked.
      “Nope,” Bob replied. “It's not too bad. It's only for a few
 seconds and he will level the wings again when he finishes his
 inspection. But it's a funny habit.”
       While Bob's aviation skills were second-to-none, he did not
 have much of an opportunity to acquire more than the rudiments
 of the Indonesian language. Working as Bob's “copilot” on all
 domestic missions, I handled communication with the crew, pas-
 sengers, and airfield personnel. But Bob was often on his own
 when conducting flight training with our pilots, none of whom
 could speak more than a most basic level of English.
       One humorous anecdote about this communications gap in-
 volved Bambang Saptoadji. Until he first sat in the right-hand seat
 of RI-002, Bambang’s experience had been limited to antiquated
Japanese aircraft with fixed gear and a control stick. As RI-002 ap-
 proached Maguwo at the end of Bambang’s first training flight, Bob
 ordered “gear down,” which Bambang correctly executed. Bob then
 asked: “Got a wheel?” At this point Bambang's minimal English-
 language skills failed him. He answered “yes” and reaffirmed his re-
 sponse by gripping the control wheel in front of him. Bob repeated:
“Got a wheel?” Again “yes”, followed by an even more demonstra-
 tive grip on the wheel, while his face showed evident confusion. Bob
 leaned over and said, calmly: “Got a landing wheel?”
       Now understanding Bob's question, Bambang looked out of
 the right cockpit window and saw that the wheel under the right
 engine, invisible to Bob in the left-hand captain's seat, was fully
 extended and locked into landing position. He turned around to
 face Bob, grinned, and took his hands off the control wheel to
 give a two-thumbs-up gesture: expressing firm assurance that all
 was in order. Then, realizing what he had just done, Bambang's
 face registered embarrassed panic as he grabbed the airplane’s
 control wheel again with a decidedly exaggerated grip.
                              FLEDGLINGS                              149
          17
          BAMBU
          RUNCING
          —
          JO G JAKA RTA
          November 1947
    One morning my breakfast on the Hotel Tugu terrace was enliv-
    ened by a parade of laskar, the term for gangs of youths organized
    into informal militias. Most members of this lascar were in their
    mid- to late- teens, dressed in near-rags and each proudly bearing
    a two-meter length of green bamboo. One end of the light, strong
    bamboo was whittled to a razor-sharp point. In skilled hands, a
    bambu runcing can wreak havoc in close-quarters combat. How-
    ever, the Dutch rarely obliged by stepping into reach before firing
    their guns, so the laskar boys were taking out insurance.
         Their destination this morning was a shrine on the slopes
    of Mount Merapi, the active volcano that dominates the land-
    scape to the north. The guardian of the shrine, which lies within
    sight of the steaming crater, was a famous dukun reputed to
    be able to tap the awesome spiritual power of the fire moun-
    tain he would bless their bamboo spears, conferring a spell of
    invulnerability on the bearer.
          One of my breakfast companions related the story of a las-
    kar leader who recently had returned to the mountain in fury and
    threatened the dukun with retribution because one of his warriors,
150                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
his younger brother, had been killed during a botched raid on a
Dutch outpost. The dukun asked for details, and was told that the
brother had been shot by a Dutch officer wielding a pistol.
      That explains it, the dukun replied. My magic spell was
meant to protect against rifle fire, not handguns.
      My companions and I laughed at the fanciful superstitions
of these sons of farmers and fisherman who believed that point-
ed sticks and magic spells would prevail over modern firearms.
While we openly acknowledged the genuine bravery of the mi-
litia boys, we also believed that only a trained, disciplined army
could properly serve our struggle.
      The roots of the laskar lay in the final months of the Japanese
occupation. As the tide of war turned against Japan and an allied
invasion became a real possibility, all boys of high-school age were
compelled to join youth militias called PETA, Pembela Tanah Air,
Defenders of the Homeland. They would spend several afternoons
a week marching around football fields with wooden rifles.
      The Allies only invaded Morotai and other islands in the
far east of the archipelago before thrusting northward to Japan,
so the Japanese remained in control of most of Indonesia un-
til the war ended in August 1945. The terms of surrender called
for the occupation forces to maintain security and order until Al-
lied troops could be dispatched.
      In Java, the Japanese commanders decided to best implement
these instructions by handing their weapons to the youthful mili-
tias they had helped to establish, then retiring to the countryside
to await repatriation. At the time I was in Semarang, where I had
taught high school since my expulsion from medical school. Re-
ports poured in about Japanese-trained (and now Japanese-armed)
militias fashioning themselves as independent freedom fighters.
My students were eager to set up their own group, and looked to
me as their natural leader. Though I was only 26 years old, by the
                           BAMBU RUNCING                              151
    standards of the era, when our statesmen were barely middle-aged
    and our senior military commanders in their early thirties, they
    regarded me as a fully mature adult, especially since I was captain
    of the high-school football team. My students and their friends
    gathered into a militia eventually known as Pasukan T.
          Initially, we restricted our activities to the sort of basic train-
    ing they practiced in the PETA militias. Each afternoon, I would
    order my troops to march around a football field, with wooden
    clubs taking the place of real firearms. I knew this basic training
    only served to keep young, enthusiastic, would-be soldiers occu-
    pied. Our first priority was to secure real weapons.
          Other militias made do with bambu runcing, but I felt that,
    no matter how deadly these weapons can be in close-quarter
    fighting, sharp sticks would be no more effective than our wood-
    en “rifles” against the Dutch guns we would face during a skir-
    mish. We conducted a few night-time “raids”, as we termed our
    benign visits to the dormitories of Japanese civilians to look for
    firearms and other useful objects. I used to stress in my brief-
    ings that we were not to touch any money or personal belongings
    having no military value. I am proud to say that my boys were
    from good and decent families and that none contravened my
    instructions. We never encountered even the slightest resistance.
    But neither did we find any firearms, since those civilians, expect-
    ing the raids, may already have surrendered their weapons to the
    military. We confiscated only one air rifle, one set of binoculars,
    and a number of samurai swords.
         We had more luck acting against the Japanese military itself.
    One evening, armed with our newly acquired samurai swords,
    we stopped a car and were surprised to find Kempeitai soldiers,
    unarmed except for one sergeant with a pistol. They obeyed
    our order to step out of the car. We confiscated the pistol and
    searched the vehicle. Since we found nothing suspicious, we al-
152                            ONE MAN AIR FORCE
lowed them to go. The boys gave the pistol to me—our first fire-
arm. Soon, more would follow, but I kept this pistol for myself
because the shape was similar to the ray gun used by Flash Gor-
don in the popular movie serial.
      In subsequent days, we found several more firearms hidden
in wells and other places, and were soon fully-equipped soldiers.
All we lacked was an enemy. It would be months before Dutch
troops ventured into Java, but this did not deter the members
of Pasukan T. Word soon came of an Ambonese, a native of
the eastern islands of the archipelago, who had married a local
woman and settled in an outlying village near the airport. Two
Pasukan T members, Pek Poedjioetomo and Koeswoyo, guns
in hand, went to the “Dutch spy's” house and called for him to
come outside and be interrogated.
      Ambonese are known for their affinity to the Dutch colo-
nials: most of the native soldiers in the colonial army were from
that region. They also tend to be bigger and stronger than most
other Indonesians, as was this “Dutch Spy,” who was in no mood
to have his private evening at home with his wife disrupted by
two high-school boys playing soldier. The Ambonese left his
house and walked right up to Pek, wresting his gun away with-
out effort. As he struggled to retrieve his firearm, Pek called on
Koeswoyo to fire his pistol. Koeswoyo let off a number of shots,
one of which killed the Ambonese. He also, as it later turned
out, had shot Pek in the foot.
      I realized that more such tragic-comic incidents would like-
ly follow if we continued as an independent, untrained militia. I
managed to convince senior officers of the newly established Na-
tional Police that we wanted to defend our Republic as part of the
official armed forces. As a result, my boys were integrated into the
Auxiliary Police Force of Semarang. They wore the new unit's uni-
form and each carried a rifle with fifty rounds of ammunition. Un-
                          BAMBU RUNCING                              153
    fortunately, as a consequence of this new status, Pasukan T could
    not remain one compact group. They were subject to detailing for
    guard duties together with elements of the National Police, and
    were therefore spread out through locations all over Semarang.
          Our career as policemen was brief. British forces, including
    a number of much-feared Gurkha units, landed in late Septem-
    ber to facilitate repatriation of interned European civilians and
    prisoners of war. As the Dutch, themselves recovering from years
    of wartime occupation, would not be arriving in any great num-
    bers until the end of the year, the British did what they could
    to keep civil order, at least in the towns. Their first act was to
    confiscate all weapons carried by civilians, including the police.
    My boys and I avoided surrendering our hard-won weapons by
    retreating twenty-five kilometers to the west, to the small town
    of Kendal, from where we launched sporadic raids. But I re-
    mained fearful that without the discipline of a formal organiza-
    tion, we would degenerate into a gang of thugs. So I disbanded
    my little militia and moved to Salatiga, a mountain town south
    of Semarang, where my “extensive military experience” and “ad-
    vanced age” gained me a commission as a senior officer in the
    Army of the Republic of Indonesia.
          While the British troops brought a large measure of stability
    to most of Java, in Surabaya the situation was in continual turmoil.
    This major port had been the headquarters of the Japanese naval
    forces in the archipelago. The Navy had been especially sympathetic
    to our revolution, and had turned over almost all of their firearms
    to the local militias in the days following the cessation of hostilities.
    The militias mounted a number of symbolic street actions, most
    notably climbing onto the roof of the Hotel Oranje, then the city's
    leading hotel, and tearing the bottom blue stripe from the Dutch
    flag to produce the merah putih, the Indonesian flag.
154                            ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Had the militias restricted their activities to this sort of street
theater, they might have kept alive the spirit of nationalism with-
out bloodshed. But, as any police officer will tell you, passionate
teenagers and loaded guns are a deadly combination. Fierce skir-
mishes raged between the British forces and militias during much
of October. To defuse the situation, the British flew Soekarno and
Hatta from Batavia to appeal for calm. Militia leaders did agree to
a ceasefire, but scarcely six hours after the two Republican lead-
ers had returned to Batavia, a militia contingent ambushed a Brit-
ish convoy, resulting in the death of Brigadier A.W.S. Mallaby, the
commander of the British forces. The following month, the British
staged a massive reprisal that killed thousands of militiamen. Indo-
nesia commemorates the carnage as the Battle of Surabaya. How-
ever, it was less a battle than a slaughter, as untrained, undisciplined
youths faced some of the most formidable warriors in the world.
      The massacre at Surabaya provided stark and brutal evi-
dence that the Republic needed a professional army who could
pick their battles, fighting with reasoned strategy and strict dis-
cipline. At that point, the Army of the Republic of Indonesia
consisted of a handful of former Dutch colonial army officers; a
larger body of officers, like myself, who were educated but had no
formal military background, and a mass of enthusiastic recruits
with no qualifications beyond a burning desire to fight for their
freedom. Somehow we had to transform this motley band into an
effective and resourceful guerrilla force.
      In 1946, the Army absorbed many of the Japanese-trained
student militias as auxiliary forces: the Tentara Pelajar and
Tentara Pelajar Genie. Both groups saw action during the first
Dutch aggression in July 1947. While their actions did little
to impede the advance of mechanized columns, their bravery
and courage under fire indicated that they could be fashioned
into a formidable guerrilla army.
                             BAMBU RUNCING                                155
          The most able and dedicated of these young freedom fighters
    were sent to Jogjakarta to be trained under Captain Ignacio Es-
    pina, the Filipino intelligence officer we carried on our marathon
    flight from the Philippines to Jogjakarta in September 1947. Ining,
    as we called him, had spent three years as a resistance fighter dur-
    ing the Japanese occupation of the Philippines, participating in
    raids against Japanese positions in conditions similar to those of
    rural Java and Sumatra. This valuable experience, and his subse-
    quent training as a member of an elite squadron of a professional
    army, made Captain Espina an ideal mentor for our own impas-
    sioned but untutored freedom fighters.
          During October and November 1947, Ining instructed his
    young proteges on the essentials of guerrilla warfare: living off
    the land, stealthy infiltration, fashioning explosives from chemi-
    cals found in farms and kitchens. Thanks in large part to Ining's
    assistance, during the following months we would enjoy remark-
    able success in ground-based maneuvers throughout Java, where
    we could depend on the active support and protection of sympa-
    thetic local residents. The Tentara Pelajar would execute a num-
    ber of daring operations, blocking roads, destroying bridges, and
    on one occasion crippling an armed Dutch convoy.
          These actions would prove crucial to our strategy to win
    global recognition of our right to self-determination. By con-
    tinually harassing Dutch positions and impeding movement,
    we inflicted major injury to Dutch complacency, and demon-
    strated to a watching world that the Republic would accept
    no less than complete autonomy.
          While Bob's stoicism and disregard for personal comfort
    were legendary, I suspect that his frequent visits to Hong Kong
    and Bangkok, which then, as now, provided single men with
    countless opportunities for recreation, helped him to handle the
    stress of revolutionary life. Captain Espina, on the other hand,
156                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
was left to endure his hardship in solitude. Only recently emerged
from three years of guerrilla warfare in the Philippine hinterland,
Ining was now alone amid a strange culture, unable to speak the
language and far from the diversions of Manila.
     I was nominally responsible for Ining during his sojourn in
Java. I had arranged accommodation in an empty house on the
northern outskirts of Jogjakarta, on the edge of the dense forests
and rugged highland terrain where he would train his teenage
guerrillas to strike swiftly then steal silently away.
     As the weeks passed, I noticed the usually gregarious Filipino
was becoming increasingly despondent and irascible. This was a
concern. Though Ining and his student soldiers shared a common
Malay heritage, he remained a foreigner, from whom our free-
dom fighters, finally free of the overbearing Dutch, would brook
no disrespect. I often witnessed Ining loudly berating his charges,
cursing in Tagalog, of which I had learned a few choice words
during my weeks stranded in Manila. I worried that one or more
of the boys might finally crack and lash back with considerable
violence and terrible consequences.
     Ining needed the companionship of his peers: educated mili-
tary officers. I asked my brother, Mas Ded, to visit whenever he
could spare the time. Another air force officer, George Reuneker,
one of the many Indos who sided with the Republic, also visited
when he could. I shared with Ining a fondness for a good drink, so
whenever I visited I would bring a bottle of whiskey purchased at
the destination of a blockade run, or a traditional tipple (based on
fermented rice, cassava or palm sap) from another region of the
Republic. At the time, I did not realize that providing the means
for Ining to drown his loneliness might not have been the best
expression of hospitality. I would soon learn how tragically I had
misjudged this awkward situation.
                           BAMBU RUNCING                             157
          18
          OLD AIRMEN'S
          TALES
          —
          JAKARTA
          September – November 1994
    American acquaintances of my age, aptly named the Great-
    est Generation for their stoic endurance of the hard times of
    the 1930s and for their courage displayed on European and
    Pacific battlegrounds, often remark that the immediate post-
    war years had been the best of their lives. Confident in victory
    and prosperous in the booming economy, they cruised open
    highways and courted their future wives in their own auto-
    mobiles before settling down to produce the next generation
    of Americans: the Baby Boomers.
          We of Indonesia's Generation of 1945 also cherish memo-
    ries of that period. Toughened by the horrors and hardships
    of the Japanese occupation, we channeled our own new-found
    confidence into realizing the dream of building a nation. How-
    ever, unlike those fortunate to live in prosperous America, few
    of us would care to relive the privations, fears, and dangers that
    marked those years of struggle. But we do often like to reminisce
    about the nobility of the times: the courage, inventiveness, and
    strong adherence to ideals—values increasingly difficult to find in
    modern Indonesia. For me, there is no better companion for these
    nostalgic journeys than my dear friend Alex Kawilarang.
158                        ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      An outstanding military leader, Alex served with great dis-
tinction as a colonel during the revolution. He had been a mem-
ber of Indonesia’s tiny corps of professional soldiers, graduates
of the Royal Dutch Military Academy. His ability, courage, and
charisma gained him the highest respect of classmates, colleagues,
and even enemies, including some of those very fighter pilots
whom Bob and I had gone to great lengths to avoid.
      One such erstwhile nemesis was Paul Verspoor, who had
led a fighter squadron of the Militarie Luchvaart, the aviation
arm of the Koninkligk Nederlands Indisch Leger, or KNIL, the
Royal Netherlands Indies Army. Paul was also a high-school
friend and military academy classmate of Alex, and the two
remained good friends through the vicissitudes of relations be-
tween their respective governments.
      After independence, Verspoor moved to the Netherlands and
a distinguished career in the Royal Netherlands Air Force, retiring
with the rank of major-general. This relocation was difficult for
Verspoor, as he regarded the East Indies as his homeland. Verspoor
could trace his family’s presence in the archipelago to the late VOC
era, and would visit Indonesia every few years with the same wist-
ful nostalgia of an immigrant to America visiting the old country.
      During lunch in a Jakarta restaurant famed for Dutch colo-
nial decor and cuisine, Alex told me of an occasion when Verspoor
had visited Jakarta in the company of another retired Militarie
Luchvaart aviator and both their wives. Alex had hosted a dinner
for the travelers in the very restaurant where we now enjoyed our
extended lunch. As is the custom of old soldiers during a reunion,
talk had turned to recounting past exploits.
      As usual, Alex dominated the conversation, relating his of-
ten-harrowing combat experieces during our struggle and when
suppressing separatist revolts during the early years of the Re-
public. Alex knew that Verspoor had not seen direct action while
                         O L D A I R M E N ' S TA L E S              159
    leading his squadron based in Medan, and that during his years
    in the Netherlands had focused on peacetime aviation activities,
    such as establishing his air forces' aerobatic-display squadron. He
    assumed that Verspoor's companion had had a similarly unevent-
    ful military career, as so was surprised when he boasted of an
    exploit: a “shotless kill” of a blockade-running Dakota.
         I froze. There were only two Dakotas lost during the struggle
    for freedom: VT-CLA, shot down on approach to Maguwo on
    the afternoon of the Ambarrawa raid, and RI-002. VT-CLA had
    definitely been a conventional kill: witnesses reported that smoke
    had poured from the damaged aircraft before impact, and that
    the fuselage had been riddled with bullet holes. That left RI-002.
    I pressed Alex for more information, but he could add only a few
    minor details; understandable given that I was asking him to re-
    member a gin-fueled night of bragging about military glory some
    years before. He had even forgotten the name of Verspoor's friend.
         I needed more information. Perhaps this anonymous aviator's
    memory was good enough to supply flight details from the inci-
    dent. I grabbed Alex by the shoulders and demanded: “Take me to
    the guest house right now!” The cozy, family-run hotel where Paul
    Verspoor and his friend had stayed was located only a short dis-
    tance from the restaurant, so we walked there, Alex grumbling all
    the way. The owner-manager also grumbled when I implored him
    to search for the guest registry from several years back.
         Fortunately, Alex enjoys wide recognition and high esteem
    among Indonesians of our generation. He persuaded the man-
    ager to “humor his old friend” and ransack his storage room.
    The manager disappeared into the back of the building, emerg-
    ing some time later with guest registers from previous years. We
    soon found Paul Verspoor's name, and the manager confirmed
    that the following entry was that of his travel companion: Guus
    van Strijp. That entry included, to my relief, a full mailing address
160                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
in the Dutch township of Vaught. I mailed a letter to Guus van
Strijp requesting a few particulars about the encounter with the
doomed aircraft of his story: altitude, course, duration of chase. I
explained that I was trying to dispel the many rumors and intense
speculation about the event. Then I waited for an answer that
might finally solve the mystery of RI-002.
      Weeks later, when mail from the Netherlands did arrive, it
brought only disappointment. It was my original letter, marked
Inconnu, Recipient Unknown. Several months afterward, Alex
Kawilarang traveled to the Netherlands for medical reasons. He of-
fered to track down van Strijp through Paul Verspoor during the
weeks he would be in Europe. He met Verspoor, and discovered that
his friend had a much different recollection of the night in question.
      Verspoor, who is noted for an excellent memory even in his
advanced years, replied with confidence that van Strijp had not
been a pilot, but a navigator, with no exploits of his own to tell.
According to Verspoor, van Strijp had simply repeated a story
which had achieved legendary status in Dutch Air Force lore:
the fighter pilots who had racked up a kill of an enemy aircraft
without actually shooting it down.
      In Verspoor's version of the events, Dutch military intelli-
gence had reported that VT-CLA was flying important Republi-
can officials into Jogjakarta, and so the Militarie Luchvaart was
instructed to intercept the aircraft and divert it to the Dutch-
controlled airstrip at Semarang on the north coast of Java. Ar-
chive documents do reveal that a high-priority intercept order
was issued on that day, along with a memo noting that detain-
ing the passengers would have severely crippled the Republican
government. In this assumption, however, the Dutch authorities
were mistaken. The Dakota had carried Agustinus Adisucip-
to and Abdurrachman Saleh, Indonesia's most accomplished
                        O L D A I R M E N ' S TA L E S                 161
    aviators. They were important figures in a symbolic, morale-
    boosting sense, but their detainment would not affect govern-
    ment operation in the slightest.
          Verspoor reiterated the official report that the pilots had in-
    tercepted VT-CLA as it descended for the final approach to Ma-
    guwo. That approach path lay over what was, at the time, dense
    forest. The pilots fired anti-aircraft rounds into the trees to the
    left of the Dakota, to attract the attention of the captain and per-
    haps to spook him with a spectacular display of exploding tree
    trunks. At that point, according to the Dutch pilots, the Dakota
    then lurched sideways and went into a steep dive, plowing into
    the earth far short of the runway.
          Good memory or not, Verspoor's recollections were suspect
    in my eyes. The deadly attack on a humanitarian flight had been
    one of the defining events of our revolution, yet more proof that
    we could not hope to negotiate with our former colonial mas-
    ters. All Jogjakarta heard the stories of hospital personnel finding
    bullet wounds in the bodies of the crash victims. I had once met
    the captain, Alexander Constantine, and knew him to have been
    a seasoned Royal Air Force squadron leader unlikely to panic
    and lose control of his aircraft.
          To my considerable surprise, Alex stood by his friend, main-
    taining that Verspoor had had no personal reason to lie or pre-
    varicate, especially about events in which he had not been in-
    volved. Alex explained that although Verspoor possessed the war-
    time experience and professional qualifications required for top
    command, he had opted to retire as a major-general instead of
    involving himself in the politics needed for promotion to a staff
    position. If a man such as Verspoor was satisfied that the Dutch
    fighters had fired only warning shots, Alex insisted, and that the
    pilot of VT-CLA had crashed while attempting low-altitude eva-
    sive maneuvers (as described in official Dutch reports of the inci-
    dent), then that is probably what happened.
162                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Verspoor had also dismissed the possibility that a Dakota
had been shot down over Sumatra the first week of October 1948.
Verspoor claimed that he had been lying in wait for RI-002 him-
self that week, as leader of a squadron patrolling the airspace
around Bukittinggi on what he termed “a very boring mission”.
If RI-002 had been intercepted by another squadron, Verspoor
noted, he would have been informed, if only to abort his own
squadron's mission and not waste resources searching for an air-
craft that had already been captured. Verspoor made some good
points, but I was nonetheless unwilling to admit that my theory
had been shot down in flames, so to speak. Then I remembered an
incident that suggested Verspoor might be correct after all.
      During one “milk run”, when we were returning to Jogja-
karta with low-value cargo and no passengers, Bob gave me an
unforgettable demonstration of a Dakota's stall characteristics.
Cruising a thousand meters over the Sumatra forest, he throttled
down the engines and then asked me to pull back on the control
yoke in front of me. The air speed dropped, and I felt a violent
shudder, first on the yoke, then in my seat as the vibrations spread
through the air frame. I expected Bob to take control of the Dako-
ta, but he calmly instructed me to gently push the nose back down
and apply low power. We gained air speed, and I could feel full
control returning as we leveled out and resumed normal flight.
      Bob then took the controls, revved the engines to full power,
dropped the flaps to full position, and hauled back violently on the
yoke. This time, with no warning whatsoever, the Dakota lurched
to the left. I looked past Bob and out of the window to see the
ground rushing toward us as the Dakota threw itself into a sicken-
ing plunge. I fought to control my panic as Bob expertly nudged
the yoke and throttles, coercing the aircraft back into stable flight.
      Ignoring my shaking hands and ashen face, Bob explained that
the unique characteristics of the Dakota's swept wing, which gives
                        O L D A I R M E N ' S TA L E S                 163
    the craft such unparalleled stability at low speeds, causes an instant
    cessation of air flow over one aileron during such a full-power stall,
    resulting in a sudden and complete loss of attitude control. I looked
    again at the ground, now slowly receding as the Dakota regained
    cruising altitude. Had this been a real emergency, and without such
    a skilled pilot as Bob Freeberg at the controls, we certainly would
    have disappeared into that featureless green wilderness.
          Even the most experienced pilots can make a wrong decision
    under intense pressure. Constantine might well have thrown his
    Dakota into a full-power stall at low altitude as he abandoned
    his landing approach and attempted to evade the Dutch fighters.
    If so, that long-ago conversation had been about the VT-CLA
    crash, not a possible interception of RI-002. I therefore might
    now have no real evidence of Dutch involvement in my friend's
    disappearance. After years of research, I was back where I start-
    ed: with many theories, a few tantalizing clues—but not a shred
    of proof. I despaired that the fate of Bob Freeberg and RI-002
    would forever remain a mystery.
164                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      19
      FREEDOM OF
      INFORMATION
      —
      JAKARTA
      October 1995
During his second term in office, American President Bill Clinton
mandated a significant expansion of his nation's Freedom of In-
formation Act, making troves of classified American documents
available to the public. Of particular interest to historians, citi-
zens unjustly accused of “anti-American activities”, and families
having a loved one who had met a mysterious fate, were docu-
ments dating from the Cold War period. The expanded powers
of the Freedom of Information Act were soon applied to solving
the mysteries of that deliberately murky period in world history. I
hoped that somewhere in the growing flood of declassified docu-
ments from embassies and other sources in the region might lie
a clue to Bob's eventual fate.
      I soon discovered that freedom of information does not
mean that the process of obtaining that information is free from
tiresome labor and frustration. Fortunately, my previous contact
at the embassy, Pamela Hyde Smith, then the Press Attaché, had
been rotated back to Washington. Though now a world away from
Indonesia, she remained enthusiastic about my quest, and eagerly
volunteered her services. Whenever she could set aside time from
official duties Pam combed the national diplomatic archives and re-
                     F R E E D O M O F I N F O R M AT I O N          165
    quested the declassification of documents with possible relevance,
    no matter how remote, to the Freeberg case. In time, her persever-
    ance paid off, and in April 1995 I received copies of numerous
    diplomatic dispatches containing mentions of Bob Freeberg.
         The first dispatch, a cable from the American consulate in
    Batavia to the State Department, dated 14 October 1948, was a
    response to a request for information about the disappearance of
    RI-002 from Clyde M. Reed, the senator from Bob's home state
    of Kansas. The dispatch confirmed that the cursory investigation
    into the disappearance, in which an officer was sent to Palembang
    to ask residents if they had seen a large airplane, was in response
    to a direct request from Reed.
          Further mentions in diplomatic dispatches indicated that
    Reed continued to press for information, but the American con-
    sulate always came up empty-handed. Reed was also instrumental
    in securing the assistance of Merle Cochrane of the Good Offices
    Committee. But even the intervention of the United Nations could
    not budge the Dutch from their contention that RI-002 had sim-
    ply vanished into thin air, as it were.
         Other dispatches offered tantalizing clues that the Dutch
    were not telling the whole truth. A letter dated 30 November
    1948 from the American Consulate in Singapore noted a visit to
    that office by two accused gun-runners recently released from
    detention at Tanjung Pinang, a Dutch-controlled island lying a
    short distance south of Singapore. The dispatch includes a state-
    ment by one of the men who claimed that after his release, while
    waiting on the dock at Tanjung Pinang to board a boat to Singa-
    pore, he was handed a scrap of paper by a dock worker, on which
    was written the word “Freeberg”. The man also mentioned that
    a Dutch warship had arrived at the port on 24 November 1948,
    a few days before the incident.
166                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
     A cable dated from the American Embassy in Bangkok men-
tions an unconfirmed report that American pilot Robert Freeberg
was imprisoned in Tanjung Pinang and would soon be transferred
to Glodok prison in Batavia. I took action on this document by
seeking the assistance of the Indonesian Department of Justice.
They acted promptly on my request for information, but without
result, since all records for Glodok were lost when the prison was
relocated to Tangerang, a suburb of Jakarta, some decades before.
     One diplomatic dispatch actually brought a smile to my face.
It was a memorandum of an informal meeting between an offi-
cer of the American embassy in Manila and Raden M. M. Soeri-
anata Djoemena, First Secretary of the Netherlands Legation to
the Philippines. The aristocratic title raden and Javanese name
indicated that Djoemena had been one of the native elite, like my
father, who had prospered under Dutch rule.
     The memo stated that Djoemena arrived at the Embassy un-
announced to deliver a detailed manifest of the cargo confiscated
from American gun runners his government had intercepted the
previous week. The officer was surprised that Djoemena would
so informally deliver legal evidence relating to an ongoing crimi-
nal case, which at any rate they had already received from their
own sources. The American's surprise turned to bemusement
when the Dutch diplomat suddenly changed the subject, asking
whether they had further information about the disappearance of
Bob Freeberg. The officer assured his Dutch counterpart that they
only knew what had been reported by the press. Djoemena then
went to great lengths to debunk the rumors that RI-002 had been
intercepted, citing the purported bad condition of the aircraft and
the poor quality of fuel available in Banten.
     As with other statements from Dutch officials, then and now,
I was struck by the numerous inaccuracies. RI-002 did not refuel
at Gorda in Banten, but had hopped over the Sunda Strait to
                      F R E E D O M O F I N F O R M AT I O N        167
Le t t e r f ro m t he U S
D e p a r t m e n t o f Vet era ns
Af fa i rs d e c l a r ing Bo b
Fre e b e rg t o be d ecea sed .
       168                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
Branti in Sumatra, which had sufficient supplies of high-quality
aviation fuel. The Dutch also must have known that while the
Singapore aviation authority indeed had questioned the airwor-
thiness of RI-002 during our stay in December 1947, Bob had
spent all of July and half of August 1948 in Manila, where the
Dakota underwent a complete overhaul. Despite the assertions
of the Dutch, I was confident that on the first afternoon of Octo-
ber 1948 a healthy young captain flew an airworthy Dakota with
tanks full of good-quality aviation fuel into clear skies—and met
a mysterious fate that, despite all my efforts for almost a decade,
I had come no nearer to solving.
     One document sent me off on another direction. It was from
the Deceased Veterans Division of the United States Department
of Veterans Affairs. The document contained no new informa-
tion, only stating that the Veterans Administration, the precur-
sor agency to the current department, had followed Dutch law
in declaring Robert Earl Freeberg (not “Bobby”) to be deceased
on 1 October 1949, a year after his disappearance. However, the
courteous cover letter accompanying the document encouraged
me to try another angle: to track down Tom Lee.
     Though I assumed Tom, who was somewhat older than Bob
and myself and not in the best of health, had already passed, his
son, Jack, would be in middle age. Perhaps his wife Marion, who
was younger than Tom, might also still be alive. In the spirit of
pursuing any possible source of information, I had written an-
other letter to the officer explaining my acquaintance with Tom
Lee and asking for any records he might have.
     The helpful Veterans Affairs officer soon replied with Tom’s
employment records, which were, it seemed, public knowledge.
The records stated that Tom Lee had stayed with the Veterans
                     F R E E D O M O F I N F O R M AT I O N         169
    Administration until 1958, when he retired and moved to Florida,
    passing away in 1963. The documents gave no indication of where
    I might contact his next of kin, so this was yet another dead end.
          However, an item caught my eye. The document listed Tom’s
    final position with the Veterans Administration as general attor-
    ney with an annual salary of seven thousand dollars. That, by
    coincidence, was what I knew to be the approximate price of a
    new Chrysler Imperial convertible in Manila in the mid-1950s.
          I knew this because in 1955 I had been posted to the Indo-
    nesian Embassy in Manila as Air Attaché. One day, while stroll-
    ing near the embassy, a late-model Chrysler Imperial convertible
    drove past. Appropriately for such a flashy automobile, the driver
    was a very pretty woman. With a shock I realized that she was
    none other than Marion Lee, Tom's wife. Being appreciative of
    his presence at my wedding and his and Marion's kindness dur-
    ing our trips to Manila, I contacted the Veterans Administration
    office to ask of his current whereabouts. I was told that he was
    currently hospitalized, but was not too ill to receive visitors.
          Marion was with her husband when I visited the hospi-
    tal. I wanted to keep the visit short, in consideration of Tom's
    condition. But we did talk about our late friend, sharing our
    most pleasant memories of Bob: of his courage, determina-
    tion, and his likable personality.
          Tom and I joked about our “aviation qualifications”. I was list-
    ed as “copilot” on most missions; Tom told me that he had been list-
    ed as “flight engineer” on the manifest of the flight from Manila to
    Jogjakarta on 17 September 1948. His friend, Cliff Baldwin, a field
    investigator for the Veterans Administration, was the “navigator.”
          Tom and Cliff had been stranded in Jogjakarta when RI-
    002 was lost two weeks later. They were finally able to secure a
    ride home through the assistance of the American Consulate in
    Batavia. But the delay in departure gave Tom the opportunity to
    attend my wedding in late October, in a sense representing Bob.
170                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Tom then grew thoughtful. He admitted that he had been
concerned about Bob’s well-being during the months before his
disappearance. Bob had been under great financial pressure, due
in large part to the inability of the Republic to pay more than a
fraction of our outstanding debt. Tom had suggested that Bob
cut his losses and seek other opportunities in the booming avia-
tion market. To his great credit, according to Tom, Bob did not
even consider this option. As long as the Indonesians attempted
in good faith to pay what we owed him, Bob had said, his Dakota
would continue to bear the proud RI-002 designation.
      Our reminiscences of years past were clearly tiring for Tom.
Marion decided we should let him rest. I said goodbye, wished
him a speedy recovery, then walked Marion out to her convertible.
      A few days afterward, a newspaper advertisement caught my
eye. It was for that model of automobile, and listed the price. Four
decades later, I would learn that Tom’s government salary had not
been sufficient to be able to afford such an expensive automobile.
Of course, there might have been a reasonable explanation: an
inheritance or wise investment. But I now wondered whether his
eagerness to treat Boedi, Pang, and myself to dinner had been
more than simple hospitality and concern. Looking back, I real-
ized that on later sojourns in Manila, when we had had sufficient
funds for food and accommodation, Tom had been no less will-
ing to set aside time for drinks or dinner with Boedi and me, and
to hear our views on the situation in Jogjakarta. Furthermore,
neither Bob nor Tom provided any clear explanation for his trip
to Jogjakarta in September 1948.
      Of course, Tom Lee was a thoroughly decent and gener-
ous person with a genuine interest in the history and politics
of the region where he lived and worked. Nevertheless, I can-
not discount the possibilty that Tom's insatiable curiosity about
the details of our struggle had been of a professional nature. I
                     F R E E D O M O F I N F O R M AT I O N          171
    know from my military and diplomatic experience that trained
    field agents and communication intercepts account for only a
    fraction of intelligence gathering. The bulk of information is
    sourced from public information sources (such as newspapers)
    and through conversations with local contacts. Though individ-
    ual items may seem unrelated, inconsequential, or implausible
    (especially if supplied by strangers at a bar), intelligence analysts
    can be quite successful at determining patterns and correlations
    concealed in masses of such material.
          Tom Lee might well have supplemented his official income
    by moonlighting for another agency of his government. If so, one
    or more intelligence arms would have been fully aware of Bob
    Freeberg's activities, and of the full extent of his relationship with
    the Republic of Indonesia. However, this information would most
    likely be classified, even 40 years later, and impossible even for
    Pamela Hyde Smith to access. I continued my investigations, frus-
    trated in the realization that important clues to the mystery might
    exist, but lay forever out of my reach.
172                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      20
      MISSION TO
      BAGUIO
      —
      JO G JAKARTA — SI N GAP ORE — MAN I LA
      November – December 1947
On the rainy evening of 27 November 1947, Bob, Boedi, and I
welcomed the delegates to the ECAFE conference in the Philip-
pines on board RI-002. Considering the importance of this flight
and the stature of the passengers, Suryadarma had ordered me
back into the cockpit of RI-002 as mission leader.
      Maguwo field teemed with foreign journalists trying to in-
terview members of the delegation. Bob was asked to stay out of
sight, a request to which he readily agreed. But as mission leader,
I was charged with getting the delegates on board and the other
tasks of readying the aircraft for flight. As word spread of my
fluency in the Dutch language, journalists from newspapers in
Batavia and the Netherlands approached me for information. I
could see in their eyes and hear in their voices an urgent need for
a quote or factual item. They knew that for their readers, espe-
cially those in government and the military, this was a big story
on which the future of the East Indies might depend.
      The Dutch regarded this mission as a far-greater threat to their
authority than running guns or dropping armed paratroopers into
disputed territories. The cornerstone of Dutch propaganda was to
portray our leaders as opportunist demagogues lacking the political
                         MISSION TO BAGUIO                             173
     maturity necessary to govern a sovereign state. Without the Dutch
     to guide and oversee us, they argued, the islands would be ruled by
     scheming criminals backed by marauding gangs of armed thugs.
          To be fair, they had a point. With the blockade choking off
     most legitimate commerce, many high-level officials did engage
     in outright criminal activity—at least in Dutch eyes. As Soekarno
     once wryly observed: “The man the Dutch call a swindler, the
     Indonesians call the Minister for the Economy”.
          And there were a number of dubious figures in positions
     of considerable influence lurking in our Republic. But for every
     shady hustler or brutal gangster, there were scores of teachers and
     technicians, clerks and administrators, all diligently performing
     the prosaic tasks required of a functioning society. In Baguio, we
     would serve notice that the Republican administration was not
     a band of outlaws, but an effective civilian government in full
     control of a disciplined military and capable of providing at least
     basic social services. We were absolutely relying on Bob to safely
     deliver our knowledgeable and articulate team of representatives
     to argue our case at this crucial international forum.
          With all on board, Bob readied for takeoff. But the rain,
     which had been heavy all evening, exploded into a torrential
     downpour. Visibility was reduced to near zero; Bob had diffi-
     culty even positioning RI-002 properly on the runway, let alone
     commencing a take-off roll. But Bob was fully aware of the im-
     portance of delivering the delegates on schedule; not to mention
     the possibility that the reports filed by the journalists might goad
     the Dutch into preventing the flight by military means should
     we delay our departure. By now Bob was thoroughly familiar
     with the runway at Maguwo: he gunned the engines and we
     punched through the driving rain.
          In contrast to our stormy departure from Jogjakarta the pre-
     vious night, we landed in Manila under clear skies; a good omen
1 74                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
for the success of this crucial conference. The delegates boarded
their bus for the conference venue in Baguio. Suryadarma had or-
dered Bob to remain in Manila during the two weeks of the con-
ference. If RI-002 were to fly in the meantime, and be damaged,
lost, or captured, our delegates would be stranded in Manila.
      Bob welcomed this chance to spend time in Manila. He
could attend to other details of his life: his apartment, a jeep that
was always in need of repair, and his new girl, June.
      She was an American Navy nurse stationed in the Philip-
pines. I met her a couple of times during those weeks, and found
her to be a pleasant and intelligent young lady: a good match for
Bob. If their relationship eventually blossomed into marriage, and
our dream of an independent Indonesia came to reality, I might
look forward to Bob and June making a home for themselves in
the nation he was helping to bring into existence.
      But that was in the future. Our priority now was to maintain
our connection between Jogjakarta and the outside world. And for
that, we needed to resolve the dispute over the ownership of the
war-surplus Dakota now proudly known to the world as RI-002.
      The court in Manila handed down the long-awaited deci-
sion the week after our arrival. It granted Bob full ownership
of RI-002, and gave Walters ten days to file an appeal. During
the two weeks we would wait to return the ECAFE delegates,
we were free to concentrate on what the Filipinos regard as
their purpose in life: parties.
      Bob and his "Indonesian Boys" (as Bob referred to his crew)
received social invitations almost every night. Our friends in Ma-
nila remained intensely curious about the situation in Indonesia.
On most nights, we dined with politicians, journalists, or business
people, all eager to know about their new neighbor to the south.
      On a more serious note, I also had a few clandestine meet-
ings with my counterpart in Army Intelligence. I praised the ef-
                         MISSION TO BAGUIO                            175
    forts of Captain Espina in training the enthusiastic young recruits
    of the Tentara Pelajar. I refrained from mentioning my concerns
    over Ining’s mental state. His emotional distress might be tempo-
    rary, but any negative report from me might be entered into his
    permanent record and adversely affect his career.
          We also discussed further assistance the Filipinos might pro-
    vide, including supplying weapons. Until now, RI-002 had carried
    only items regarded by all as legitimate cargo (albeit sometimes
    with disputed ownership) such as our initial load of quinine. How-
    ever, I knew that the military aspect of our struggle, the guerrilla
    raids on Dutch positions, were proving effective at rattling the au-
    thorities in Batavia and the Hague and boosting morale at home.
    We needed more weapons and ammunition. The Republic had al-
    ready begun to purchase firearms at high cost from blatantly crimi-
    nal gun-runners. I felt that sourcing weapons from the Philippines
    military through our covert liaison would be a much better option.
          While we continued to enjoy the full official support of our
    sister republic, Bob discovered that his own government, or at least
    the representatives in Manila, had little interest in assisting or even
    acknowledging the existence of the Republic of Indonesia. Bob
    was humiliated when the American ambassador refused a request
    to meet with us. Bob sought to save face by mentioning that the lo-
    cal American community held the ambassador in contempt, calling
    him, in Bob's words, a “weak sister” whose subjects of conversa-
    tion were limited to whiskey and horses. I suggested to Bob that
    perhaps the ambassador was simply being cautious, as any meeting
    with Indonesian officials, even low-ranking ones such as ourselves,
    might somehow affect the delicate negotiations taking place at Ba-
    guio. But Bob was not mollified, and the incident only reaffirmed
    his jaundiced view of American diplomats in Asia.
          Bob endured one inconvenience in this social whirl: he
    had no suits appropriate for the more formal gatherings. Bob
176                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
had not yet received the Palm Beach suits he had ordered from
Kansas six months previously. As Asians, Boedi and I were
able to borrow dress shirts and jackets from friends in Ma-
nila when necessary, but Bob was compelled to send the one
suit he had bought in Hong Kong for expensive dry clean-
ing between formal engagements.
      Our mutual friend Tom Lee was amused when I told him of
Bob's continuing sartorial saga. He said that this was typical of
the petty annoyances suffered by expatriate Westerners in Asia. He
suggested that Bob put a tracer on the suits, and hope for the best.
      Tom and I were having dinner, our one opportunity to meet
during my busy two weeks in Manila. It was also a chance for
me to repay Tom for his previous kindness. During the weeks we
were essentially penniless in Manila as we attempted to sell our
cargo of quinine and vanilla, Tom Lee would often treat Boedi,
Pang, and me to a decent meal, a welcome change from our mo-
notonous diet of cheap curry. Now, in possession of an expense
allowance adequate for the entire two weeks we would be in
Manila, Tom would be my guest.
      Tom was delighted to accept my dinner invitation, and re-
luctantly agreed to let me pick up the check. During the dinner,
Tom expressed great interest about communist activity in the Re-
public. I could understand Tom’s concern. The Philippines had
been rocked by a communist-related insurrection within months
of achieving independence, and left-wing guerrilla attacks were
becoming frequent in Malaya. Normally, I would be guarded in
expressing my personal opinions about such a subject. Especially
now, in my role as support staff for a top-level delegation to an
international conference, I was considered to be an official repre-
sentative of the Republic of Indonesia. But Tom Lee was a close
friend (not to mention a lawyer who is trained at keeping secrets)
so I felt I could talk freely with him in private conversation.
                          MISSION TO BAGUIO                          177
          I told him that communism was a concern for me as well. The
    communist and nationalist movements had grown in tandem in
    the Netherlands East Indies during the final years of colonial rule.
    To be sure, most nationalist theoreticians had harbored varying
    degrees of Marxist and even Stalinist sympathies. While socialist
    theory provided the foundation for the political and economic
    guidelines needed to create an independent Indonesia where all
    would prosper, our senior leaders insisted that there was no role
    in our revolution for doctrinaire communism.
          But I worried that a significant number of military officers
    had communist leanings. In this I would include some of my
    erstwhile superiors in the Army, which I had joined after the dis-
    banding of Pasukan T. In the propaganda section, where I had
    held the rather inflated rank of Lieutenant Colonel, my duties
    included disseminating information that I felt to be misleading
    or simply untrue, and obviously intended to serve the interests of
    the international communist movement over our own nationalist
    cause. My dissatisfaction led to me leaving the Army and accept-
    ing Suryadarma's offer of a commission in the Air Force.
         Tom told me that, in his opinion, his own government was
    not paying sufficient attention to communist activity in Southeast
    Asia. Their focus was on the nations of eastern Europe that been
    absorbed under Soviet Union hegemony in the aftermath of the
    war. I assured Tom that, at least in the case of Indonesia, his govern-
    ment need not be overly concerned. Indonesians are an inherently
    moderate, conservative people, and most of us are not swayed by
    extreme ideologies. If left to our own devices, we would prefer to
    take the middle road and join the community of free nations.
         A few days before our scheduled return to Jogjakarta, Boedi
    burst into our rented room waving that day’s edition of a Ma-
    nila newspaper. A report stated that our colleagues Halim Per-
    danakusuma and Iswahyudi, whom we had flown to Bangkok
178                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
the previous month, had crashed on a beach on the west coast
of Malaya. They had succeeding in purchasing an Avro-Anson,
which was given the registration RI-003. They were flying it back
to Sumatra when the crash occurred.
      The investigators scoured the wreckage for guns and other
contraband, but found only household items such as dinner plates.
This poignant detail, for me, defines the nature of our struggle.
Halim and Iswahyudi were both young men who had planned to
marry on their return to Jogjakarta. The Dutch portrayed us as
contraband runners and opportunistic criminals. But these par-
ticular blockade runners were only smuggling in household es-
sentials in scarce supply in blockaded Java. In our culture, a man
should not marry unless he can set up a suitable household for his
family. These two pilots, now national heroes, were only trying to
begin married life with some small measure of dignity.
      The untimely demise of two of our best aviators was not
the only tragedy I experienced that week. A few nights later I ac-
companied Boedi to Makati airfield, where RI-002 was parked,
to contact Air Force command in Jogjakarta through the on-
board radio. Because of the distance involved, the communica-
tion was done through Morse Code. The republic had only the
most rudimentary radio encryption; all transmissions were in
plain language. With the Dutch (and anyone else) able to moni-
tor the transmissions, conversations were nothing more than per-
functory confirmations that all was going according to schedule.
Thus, I was surprised on this evening when Boedi remained on
the radio for many minutes, tapping furiously on the code key.
Finally, Boedi signed off, took off his headset, and turned to me,
tears streaming down his cheeks.
     “Ining is dood, maar je broer is ook dood.” Ining
is dead, and so is your brother.
                        MISSION TO BAGUIO                          179
          I stood rigid in shock for a moment, then pressed Boedi
    for details. But he had nothing more to say. Jogjakarta could
    not supply details without revealing clues to Captain Espina’s
    identity and mission. They only stated that my brother and
    a companion, referred to only by his nickname, Ining, had
    died in an accidental shooting.
          With that meager amount of information, I went to Phil-
    ippine Army Intelligence Headquarters and reported to Espina’s
    superior, Major Primitivo San Augustin. The Major’s reaction al-
    ternated between disbelief and rage. He queried me on details,
    which, of course, I was not able to provide. More officers arrived;
    at one point I had a dozen people shooting questions at me from
    all sides. Emotions rose, and I realized that I was not being treated
    as a military colleague, but as a criminal suspect. Or more accu-
    rately, an accomplice. The officers suspected that Ining had been
    assassinated by a communist agent: my brother.
          Now I was being accused of the very thing I fled the Army to
    avoid. Fortunately, as a high-born Javanese, I had been trained in
    emotional self-control since childhood. I kept my composure and
    answered their questions in an even voice, until Major Primitivo
    accepted that the deaths had been some sort of accident. He let me
    go, but insisted that Ining’s body be secretly repatriated to conceal
    the involvement of the Philippine military in our revolution.
          On 17 December 1947 we flew the ECAFE delegates back
    to Jogjakarta. After my mission debriefing with Suryadarma, I
    sought out George Reneuker for more information about the
    death of Ining and my brother.
          George had been on duty at Maguwo the night we left and
    had seen Ining run onto the tarmac as we started our takeoff roll.
    He noticed that Ining was highly agitated, and asked if there was
    a problem. Ining showed George a letter that he had intended
    to give to me to pass on to Major Primitivo. He explained that
180                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
he had been en route from his house on the outskirts of Jogja
to Maguwo before he realized that he had left the letter on his
desk. Ining had rushed back to retrieve it. Because of this delay, he
reached the airfield moments too late.
     Ining had seemed to be in real distress. George would be
too busy to accompany Ining in the coming days, so he asked my
brother to stay with him until he calmed down. The police and
investigating doctor determined on the day of the accident my
brother had been killed while attempting to wrestle a weapon
away from Ining, and that Ining had then shot himself.
     By the time we returned, the news of the murder/suicide
was common knowledge throughout Jogjakarta. I worried that
one of the many foreign journalists in Jogjakarta to interview
the returning delegates might stumble onto the connection be-
tween Bob and Ining and seek out my friend for information. On
my suggestion, Suryadarma arranged for Bob to be spirited off
to Kaliurang for a week of relaxing in the highland air, out of
sight of the foreigners in town.
     Suryadarma fully intended to fulfill Major Primitivo’s re-
quest to repatriate Ining’s remains, but was reluctant to send Bob
straight back to Manila. RI-002 remained the only dependable
link between Jogjakarta, other Republican territories, and the rest
of the world. Before letting Bob go, Suryadarma would clear up
the backlog of missions on his plate.
     After a week in the mountain resort, a relaxed and cheery
Bob Freeberg returned to Jogjakarta. We flew two missions to
other destinations in Sumatra. On 29 December, we were finally
ready to fly poor Ining back home. It would be a roundabout
journey; we would also carry twenty flight cadets to school in
India, where they would qualify on twin-engine craft. As much
as we valued Bob’s contribution and admired him personally, we
                         MISSION TO BAGUIO                            181
    needed to end our precarious dependence on him and his ram-
    shackle Dakota. Thus, Suryadarma was placing a high priority on
    developing a corps of pilots able to fly larger aircraft.
          Our plan was to fly first to the freshwater port of Pekan-
    baru in Sumatra, where the cadets would take a smuggler’s boat
    across the Malacca Strait to the mainland and then overland to
    India. Also on the flight would be three military officers (and
    their wives) who had been assigned to military bases in Pekan-
    baru. Shortly after noon, with the two dozen passengers, Ining
    in a black tin coffin, and two reserve tanks of fuel, a heavily lad-
    en RI-002 lumbered into the sky.
          We had left our departure too late in the day, and arrived
    to find a solid overcast sky concealing Pekanbaru. We circled the
    location, hoping that the clouds might disperse sufficiently to lo-
    cate the airfield, until only one hour of fuel remained. We then
    decided to fly on to nearby Singapore and land at Changi; at
    the time Singapore’s military airfield and the base of a Royal Air
    Force transport squadron. The Republic had granted the squad-
    ron permission to use our airfields during operations to repatriate
    European internees in the weeks after the Japanese surrender. I
    hoped that the British would return the favor by allowing us to
    refuel and try again to land at Pekanbaru the following morning.
          To conceal the identity of our deceased passenger, we
    concocted the plausible story that the coffin carried the body
    of “Achmad”, a guerrilla fighter who had died in action. The
    Republic was granting the wish of “Achmad's” wealthy and
    influential family to return the remains for burial in their an-
    cestral village near Pekanbaru.
          The staff at Changi were indeed welcoming, assigning a
    suitable parking space and permitting us to purchase the fuel
    we needed to continue our mission. But Dutch diplomats in Sin-
    gapore soon learned of our arrival and pressured the local civil
182                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
aviation authority to impound RI-002 as a blockade runner. The
British refused to take sides in the dispute between Batavia and
Jogjakarta. However, they did dispatch an inspector to Changi.
This official arrived shortly before sunset, made a thorough in-
spection, then pulled Bob's flight clearance, citing doubts about
the air-worthiness of the Dakota.
       I must admit that he had a point. Even for a war-surplus air-
craft, after six months of landings on badly maintained airstrips
and other abuses, RI-002 was in pretty poor shape. The original
military drab-green paint had been stripped off and the hull paint-
ed white, though with scratches visible everywhere. Both the rud-
der and elevator were damaged and crudely patched. Most of the
original windows were gone, replaced with Plexiglas. Bob himself
worried about the engines, which had not yet been replaced since
the Dakota rolled out of the factory almost a decade before. The of-
ficial instructed Bob to either dispose of the aircraft or effect repairs,
and scheduled an evaluation flight in two week's time.
       Our passengers elected to continue their journey by other
means. They all took a train to the port town of Penang in Malaya.
The officers boarded John Lie's notorious smuggling boat for the
crossing to Medan, from where they set out on a grueling two-
month march through the Sumatran rain forest to their assigned
posts in Pekanbaru. The cadets continued overland through Siam
and Burma, eventually reaching India. Meanwhile, Bob, Boedi,
and I set to work to make the de-facto flagship of the Air Force of
the Republic of Indonesia fit to fly.
                          MISSION TO BAGUIO                                183
          21
          FORGOTTEN
          HERO
          —
          JAKARTA — N E W YORK
          June 1996 – July 1997
          Flying is often described as hours of excruciating boredom
    punctuated by moments of gut-wrenching terror. “Fearless Free-
    berg” could deal with airborne emergencies with an eerie aplomb,
    but Bob also had his light side, and was adept at relieving the te-
    dium of long flights and layovers on isolated airstrips. To pass the
    idle hours, he often entertained us with tales of life on the empty
    plains of Kansas, so different from mountainous, teeming Java.
          Bob once told me of his brother Virgil's wish to carry on
    the farming tradition of the Freeberg family. With the help of the
    American Embassy in Jakarta, I obtained the address of a Virgil
    Freeberg in Bob's home town of Parsons, Kansas, and wrote to
    him. He was, in fact, Bobby's middle brother, but his answering
    letter contained only greetings and innocuous comments about
    his deceased elder brother. He did not reply to my second letter.
    That was my only direct contact with the Freeberg family.
          In 1995, I met with Air Vice Marshall (Retired) Soedjono, who
    in 1956 had been Air Force Attache at the Indonesian Embassy in
    Washington, D.C. That year, Suryadarma had dispatched him to
184                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
Parsons, Kansas, to deliver a sum of money to Bob's parents as a
token of sympathy and condolence. Soedjono is blessed with a for-
midable memory, and remembered every detail of the conversation.
     “We don’t know anything about what happened to Bob,”
Soedjono told them. “What we have heard were only rumors.
One rumor says that he was taken prisoner by the Dutch army
and that he died in detention.”
     “If it is true then it is just like Bob,” Mrs. Freeberg re-
plied. “My son is very stubborn and he would defy any
harsh treatment till the end.”
      Mrs. Freeberg told Soedjono that their friend Clyde Reed
had visited them shortly after the disappearance. Reed, a jour-
nalist and progressive politician, had served a term as Kansas
governor and two terms as a senator for the state, passing away
in 1949. The family had appreciated his concern, but were puz-
zled by his behavior. Normally, Reed was relaxed and effusive
while among old friends such as the Freebergs. But on that oc-
casion he was guarded in his conversation, as though he knew
something but would not tell them.
      Mrs. Freeberg also told Soedjono that, in his letters, Bob had
expressed great admiration for the revolution, of the courage of
the soldiers and their willingness to sacrifice everything for free-
dom. She revealed that Bob had been encouraging his younger
brother Paul to take advantage of his opportunity for a free uni-
versity education under the GI Bill to study petroleum engineering.
If, as he had planned, Bob became a major player in the post-
independence aviation industry, he could arrange for Paul to be
given a technical position in the oil industry, helping to build the
economy of an independent Indonesia by exploiting the archipel-
ago’s massive oil reserves. Bob had even suggested that he build
a retirement home for his parents, perhaps in the cool highlands
north of Jogjakarta that he so loved.
                          FORGOTTEN HERO                             185
          One of the newspaper articles from the time of the disap-
    pearance stated that Bob was born in Pittsburg, Kansas. That was
    incorrect: Bob was born in McCune, Kansas and was raised in
    Parsons. However, the family did live for a brief period in near-
    by Pittsburg. On the chance that some members of the Freeberg
    clan still lived in that town, I again requested the assistance of
    the American Embassy in Jakarta. They gave me the address of
    the Pittsburg Public Library, along with the name of the head
    librarian, Carol Ann Robb. I wrote her a letter explaining my
    interest in the Freeberg family. She happened to be acquainted
    with a John Freeberg, and contacted him on my behalf. He was
    indeed a cousin of the Parsons Freebergs, but had little contact
    with Bob's side of the family.
          In her letter of reply she enclosed, to my surprise and delight,
    copies of clippings from archives of the local newspaper, The Pitts-
    burgh Headlight, relating to the disappearance of RI-002. One ar-
    ticle stated that Salipada Pendatun, the Filipino senator who had
    been our lawyer when we fought the Dutch attempt to claim our
    cargo of quinine, had claimed to have received a telegram from
    Bob ten days after his disappearance. Acting on this message, he
    had contacted Senator Clyde Reed.
          I was astonished at this new twist in the tale. Following
    our victory in the “Quinine Case” Pendatun had assumed the
    role of informal diplomatic liaison between the Philippines and
    Indonesia. But in December 1949, on the eve of the Dutch ca-
    pitulation, Pendatun suddenly distanced himself from the Indo-
    nesian community in Manila and played no further role in rela-
    tions between the two republics.
          Pendatun might have turned his back on Indonesia for whol-
    ly unrelated reasons, or even, perhaps, in a fit of pique at being
    passed over as Ambassador to the Republic of Indonesia, a posi-
    tion for which he was certainly qualified. But the timing of this
186                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
abrupt reversal of sympathies seemed suspicious in light of fur-
ther information I received about Senator Reed.
      According to The Pittsburgh Headlight, Reed had repeatedly
pressed the American consulate in Batavia to investigate the dis-
appearance of RI-002. In a follow-up letter to Ms. Robb I asked
where Senator Reed had donated his papers. She informed me
that Reed had not elected to donate his papers to the state library,
as was customary. Instead, he had instructed that all his papers be
destroyed shortly before his death from pneumonia in 1949.
      I continued my correspondence with the accommodating
Ms. Robb, her generosity of spirit in volunteering assistance to a
complete stranger evoking fond memories of her fellow Kansas
native. She suggested I contact Gene DeGruson, Head of Special
Collections of the Pittsburg State University Library, who might
know if any of Reed's papers had survived. I contacted DeGru-
son, who responded immediately, seemingly eager to investigate
the case of this missing “Son of Parsons”. He promised to begin
his research in the archives of the Parsons town newspaper, The
Parsons Sun. But in subsequent months I heard no further word
from DeGruson, despite several letters of reminder.
      DeGruson's sudden cessation of communication, Penda-
tun's abrupt about-face, and Reed's odd decision to destroy his
papers might have been no more than coincidence. But there
comes a point when coincidence and random chance cease to be
plausible explanations. After almost a decade of investigation,
I firmly believed that some thread connected the many myster-
ies I had uncovered. However, nothing in my research indicated
what that connection might be.
      One of the documents I received from the American govern-
ment was a letter dated 17 November 1948 from Metropolitan
Life, Bob's life insurance company, to the State Department, inquir-
ing on behalf of Bob's parents about his death. The State Depart-
                           FORGOTTEN HERO                            187
    ment replied that, according to Dutch law (applicable in the case of
    a foreign national disappearing from Dutch territory), death could
    only be established one year after the individual was declared miss-
    ing. That was true. Documents I received from the United States
    Veterans Administration showed that the government had followed
    that protocol and declared Bob as deceased in October 1949.
          However, a private business might have had their own pro-
    cedures, and might have come up with a different date. On the
    admittedly slim chance that their records differed from the of-
    ficial version, and that the discrepancy might provide a clue to his
    real fate, in 1996 I wrote to Metropolitan Life in New York for
    the details of Bob's insurance claim.
          I received a reply from the company archivist, Daniel May,
    who wrote that my inquiry had been passed to the Corporate
    Records Management Department. Some months passed. I wrote
    again to Daniel May, who once more stated that my request was
    being handled by Corporate Records Management. More time
    passed without a word from Metropolitan Life.
          In July 1997 I flew to Vancouver, Canada, to attend my son's
    wedding to a Canadian woman. I had bought a round-the-world
    ticket so I could visit friends in Europe on the return journey, and
    included a stopover in New York on the itinerary. During my day
    in New York, I attempted to contact Daniel May, hoping that I
    could perhaps meet him personally. But after trying the entire
    morning to get a message through, I was told he was too busy.
          I put down the telephone and looked out the hotel window
    onto the bustling streets of Manhattan. Whether Bobby had been
    captured, detained, and killed, or had simply crashed into a remote
    mountain, now seemed irrelevant. I felt that the world had moved
    on, and that Bob Freeberg had become just another forgotten hero.
188                               ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      22
      INTERLUDE
      IN MANILA
      —
      SING APORE W MANI LA
      January - March 1948
“In my opinion, the body is that of an Indonesian,” the Singapore
medical examiner stated to the assembled British and Dutch of-
ficials. The Dutch had requested a court order to open the coffin
of “Achmad the Guerrilla” to check for firearms or other contra-
band, which could have provided grounds for impounding RI-
002 and jailing the crew. Fortunately, the British physician could
not determine the difference between the decomposing remains
of an Indonesian and those of a Filipino.
      Accusing us of the old trick of smuggling contraband in
a sealed coffin had been the final, desperate attempt by the
Dutch to ground RI-002 by legal and diplomatic means. In Ma-
nila, Bangkok, and now Singapore, the Dutch had attempted
to bully local authorities into complying with their demands
to stop RI-002 from further blockade runs. But they had
been thwarted at every turn by Asians exercising their new-
found power to make decisions favorable to their own inter-
ests, not those of foreign masters.
      After a fortnight of repairs, the civil aviation authorities in
Singapore certified RI-002 as fit to carry cargo and crew, though
not passengers. RI-002 took off from Changi during the wee
                        INTERLUDE IN MANILA                           189
    hours of 15 January 1948, ostensibly bound for Pekanbaru. Of
    course, we had no intention of landing in Sumatra. Our original
    passengers had made their own way to Pekanbaru weeks before;
    our task now was to deliver the remains of Captain Espina to his
    army unit in Manila. So, after about thirty minutes in the air, Bob
    radioed Singapore air-traffic control:
         “This is RI-002. Pekanbaru in sight. Request to
    leave your frequency.”
         Singapore replied: “RI-002. You're cleared to leave this
    frequency. Cheerio.”
         Bob then did an aerial about-face and set course for Labuan.
    There we were treated in the usual way: no nasty questions, no
    problems with customs or immigration. We made no mention of
    “Achmad the Guerrilla”, instead giving the authorities the mar-
    ginally more truthful story that we had come straight from Jogja-
    karta to repatriate the remains of a Filipino government observer
    who had passed away of sudden illness in Jogjakarta. After a
    quick refuel, we continued on to Manila.
         Despite all efforts to maintain secrecy, Manila newspapers
    duly reported the funeral of Captain Ignacio Espina and the mys-
    terious circumstances of his death and manner of repatriation.
    One editorial surmised that he had been killed when a firearms-
    smuggling operation had gone disastrously wrong.
         The Dutch were not amused. Government archives in the
    Netherlands indicate that the repeated failures to have RI-002
    permanently grounded, along with the revelation that we had bla-
    tantly lied about our cargo and flight plan, prompted Batavia to
    clamp down on all flights into Republican territory. Under the
    new protocols, any aircraft bound for Republican airspace which
    had not obtained clearance from Batavia before departure would
    be intercepted and forced to land at the nearest Dutch-controlled
190                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
airfield. In cases of non-compliance, deadly force was permitted.
In these documents, Bob Freeberg was mentioned by name as the
most notorious of the blockade runners.
      Though the formal bureaucratic language used in these
documents betrays no hint of emotion, I am certain that the co-
lonial authorities regarded Bob's cavalier flaunting of their sov-
ereign airspace as a personal affront. From then on, Bob was a
marked man, for whom the sight of a patrolling Dutch Kittyhawk
or Mustang fighter would be the harbinger of, at best, a long pe-
riod in detention, and at worst, a fiery end in some rice field or
forest. Fortunately, the Indonesian archipelago is vast, and one
white-painted airplane is difficult to spot in the cloud-laden tropi-
cal sky. But even his preternatural flying skills and uncanny luck
would not keep Bob The Best safe from the expert and dedicat-
ed Dutch fighter pilots forever.
      For Bob, our third lengthy sojourn in Manila began with
disappointment. A letter from his business partner in Singapore
confirmed that their Southeastern Airlines venture had failed.
Apparently, according to Bob, his partners had been so dis-
tracted by the many delights of expatriate life in Southeast Asia
that neither had been willing to put in the time and effort re-
quired to build a viable business.
      This disappointment was soon relieved by some truly wel-
come news. Bob Walters had not lodged an appeal against the
previous month’s court ruling granting Bob lawful possession
of RI-002 within the specified time limit. Therefore, the ruling
was now final and irrevocable.
      At last, the flagship of the Air Force of the Republic of In-
donesia was not in danger of being repossessed through a tawdry
commercial dispute between two itinerant foreign aviators. Bob
celebrated his victory in the style of any pilot: he refurbished his
aircraft. The temporary revocation of Bob’s airworthiness certifi-
                         INTERLUDE IN MANILA                          191
    cate in Singapore had driven home the need to get RI-002 in bet-
    ter condition. While the engines still ran adequately, Bob knew it
    was only a matter of time before they gave us trouble.
           Boedi and I kept ourselves busy doing informal liaison work
    with interested parties in Manila. Events were rapidly unfolding
    in the south; many Filipinos were eager to be kept abreast of de-
    velopments and to hear the views of Indonesians themselves.
           A popular topic of conversation was the Renville Agreement
    ratified on 17 January 1948. While our delegates were making
    the technical case for the viability of an independent Indonesia
    in Baguio, the GOC continued to push for direct negotiations be-
    tween Batavia and Jogjakarta. However, by this time the respec-
    tive governments so distrusted the other side’s intentions that they
    could not even agree on where to meet. To break the impasse, the
    United States sent a troop transport, the USS Renville, to Bata-
    via. The Renville dropped anchor near the port, providing a neu-
    tral venue for the discussions.
           The arrangement proved satisfactory, and a month of heat-
    ed negociation began. In the end, each side agreed to withdraw
    any forces to their respective sides of the Van Mook line sepa-
    rating Republican from Netherlands Indies territory in Java, and
    work toward the establishment of a federal nation consisting of
    the current Republic of Indonesia along with fifteen states set up
    by the Dutch, which comprised parts of Java and Sumatra and
    all of the islands to the east.
           Shortly after the signing of the Renville Agreement, Tom and
    I met again. Tom said he was curious about my take on the new
    agreement, which was generating much controversy in the Repub-
    lic. I told Tom that while most of my colleagues believed Renville
    to be an acceptable compromise, many had misgivings. The agree-
    ment was intended to provide a framework for the establishment
    of a federal state encompassing the entire archipelago. Though, at
192                            ONE MAN AIR FORCE
least in theory, Renville granted considerable autonomy and self-
determination to member states, in practice the agreement under-
cut the Republic right from the start. The agreement would give
us the equivalent status to the various Dutch puppet states. We
feared we would be outvoted in any critical decision.
      Tom then told me he was becoming increasingly worried
about Bob, and, by extension, me, since I spent so much of my
time in the cockpit of RI-002. The Dutch were now literally gun-
ning for Bob, but he could expect no help from the Americans.
American diplomats regarded Bob as, at best, an annoyance, and
at worst an impediment to America’s interests. This is why the
American ambassador in Manila had refused to meet Bob and me
while the ECAFE delegates were in Baguio.
      Tom told me that considering the instability in the region,
with communist insurgencies in the French and British colonies,
the United States would prefer that the Dutch maintain control
over the chain of islands separating the Southeast Asian main-
land from Australia. The American consulate in Batavia adhered
to the Dutch view that the entire Republican government were
opportunist extremists with no ability or desire to govern their
own Republic, let alone the many thousands of islands of a future
Indonesian nation. Tom said that the American diplomats had al-
ready been embarrassed by another young American, a journal-
ist and political science graduate student who had driven a jeep
across the Van Mook line from Batavia to Jogjakarta and was
writing articles sympathetic to the Republicans and critical of the
Dutch. Tom worried that powerful forces were gathering with the
intention of vanquishing Bob from the skies.
      As during our previous extended sojourn in Manila, we often
passed time in Bob’s apartment, chatting with his roommates and
any other members of the Aviation Brotherhood who happened by.
                        INTERLUDE IN MANILA                         193
          It was during one of these occasions that I solidified my distrust
    of Bob’s housemates. We all had had a fair amount to drink, and as
    usual for pilots in such a situation, talk turned to boasting about pre-
    vious spine-tingling near-disasters or triumphant exploits in the sky.
    But this time, one of Bob’s housemates (I will not reveal which one)
    boasted about shooting down his own despised wing commander
    during a mission in wartime Europe. I was shocked into silence, but
    all the other airmen shouted their boisterous approval.
          In my culture, superior figures in the military, society, or
    politics are always afforded due respect. We may denigrate our
    senior officers or politicians in private conversation, but inflicting
    violence would be unthinkable. From this point, my mild disap-
    proval of their feckless lifestyle changed to utter moral condem-
    nation. This would have serious consequences in the next weeks,
    as our missions took us into uncharted, perilous territory.
          In early March 1948, we finally received the long-delayed
    payment for the cargo of quinine and vanilla we had transported
    to Manila on the inaugural blockade run of RI-002. Salipada Pen-
    datun thought this to be an event worthy of celebration, and so
    offered to host a small dinner party at his home.
          On the evening of the party, Bob picked up Boedi and me
    in his jeep, now running like new. June, the Navy nurse he had
    been dating for a few months, was in the front passenger seat. For
    once, Bob was dressed in a manner appropriate for a young man
    taking a pretty girl to a party. As Boedi and I clambered into the
    back seat of the jeep, I complimented Bob on his smart new suit,
    perfectly fitted to his large frame.
          He told me that this was one of several bespoke tropical suits
    he had ordered from a tailor in Manila. In recent months the cost
    of textiles had dropped significantly, so Bob thought that he should
    stock up now. Bob felt that the round of social engagements and
    press attention during the ECAFE conference, and his region-wide
    reputation as “Indonesia’s One Man Air Force” indicated that he
    should, whenever not actually flying RI-002, look his best.
194                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      I asked Bob about the suits he had ordered from Kansas.
He sighed and said that they must have been stolen, mutter-
ing a derogatory implication about the “flips”, as the expatri-
ate Americans called their Filipino former colonial subjects and
current hosts. Though Bob was acquainted with many Filipi-
nos and valued their friendship, I also knew that he was often
frustrated with their lax work ethic and casual attitude toward
the truth. I know that some of my compatriots are prone to the
same character traits, and hoped that they would not diminish
Indonesians in Bob's eyes as well.
      I, too, would be shopping for clothes. During the following
days, Boedi and I were constantly on the move, purchasing medi-
cines, automobile spare parts and other necessities with the pro-
ceeds of the quinine sale. And like Bob, I also set aside a budget
for some nice shirts and trousers.
      This was not frivolity. The items I bought were for fellow
officers whose uniforms were all but falling off their bodies. Af-
ter years of wartime occupation and the blockade, textiles were
simply unavailable. Even President Sukarno was forced to fash-
ion a woman's wool skirt brought from Australia into a pair of
knee-length shorts. And our rank-and-file soldiers did wear rags:
whatever scraps of clothing they could scrounge, endlessly sewn
and patched. At times, Boedi and I felt slightly embarrassed when
returning from an overseas mission wearing a newly purchased
item of clothing. A few boxes of shirts and trousers for our col-
leagues would be the most practical show of appreciation for
those attending to the crucial, thankless tasks back home.
      Bob used most of his share from the quinine sale to pay off
the bill for the replacement engines and other improvements to
RI-002. Then we learned that while he may have been a hard-
driving soldier of fortune, he still cherished his family ties—fur-
                        INTERLUDE IN MANILA                         195
    ther endearing him to Indonesian hearts. Though strapped for
    cash after paying off his debts, Bob set aside several thousand
    dollars for a gift to his parents in Kansas.
          “Now I can buy my mother a car; a thing I wanted to do for
    a long time,” he said, proudly showing us the cable and money
    order to a Kansas Oldsmobile dealer.
          The following day, we departed for Jogjakarta. As we accel-
    erated down the runway, I felt an unfamiliar sensation of exulta-
    tion. We were returning to Jogjakarta with a full load of critical
    supplies in a refurbished blockade runner piloted by the undis-
    puted legal owner. I looked forward to a new, glorious chapter in
    our blockade-running adventures. I could not imagine that our
    most severe trials still lay before us.
196                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      23
      BLACK
      FLIGHTS
      —
      JO G JAKARTA — B U K I TTI N GGI — MAN I LA
      March – April 1948
In March 1948, with new engines on the wings, RI-002 re-
turned to the service of the Republic of Indonesia. Now we had
a second base of operations: the pretty mountain town of Bukit-
tinggi in Sumatra. The birthplace of Vice President Muhammad
Hatta, Bukittinggi boasted a long history of political indepen-
dence—the loyalty of both the elite and the general populace to
the Republic was not in question.
     The city was also a sensible choice for logistical reasons. Sit-
uated halfway up the Bukit Barisan range running along the west
coast of Sumatra, Bukittinggi was a short flight away from Singa-
pore, Bangkok, or Songha. Bob himself was directly responsible
for Bukittinggi becoming this unlikely aviation hub. The year be-
fore, during his CALI blockade run, Bob had dropped two army
engineers who organized a labor gang to repair the runway.
      Besides Bob, Bukittinggi played host to a number of the
Aviation Brotherhood. One regular visitor was Richard Ralph
Cobley, who had served in both the British Army and Australian
Air Force during the war. He brought his amphibious Catalina to
our service, eminently useful in a nation with many waterways
but only a handful of airstrips.
                             BLACK FLIGHTS                            197
          I was both distrustful and somewhat amused by the colorful
    Mr. Cobley. Listening to him openly boast of his smuggling ad-
    ventures, I could easily picture Cobley as one of the semi-piratical
    European traders of the previous century, expertly piloting their
    fast schooners to avoid British and Dutch naval patrols as they
    ferried contraband between clandestine trading posts.
          In marked contrast to Cobley was another regular visitor,
    the American pilot Dave Fowler. As laconic and circumspect as
    Cobley was overbearing and reckless, Fowler was not a free-
    booting adventurer but a salaried employee. The two-week forced
    grounding of RI-002 in Singapore had underscored the perils of
    relying on one battered aircraft and overworked pilot as our sole
    communications channel with the rest of the world. In March,
    Vice President Hatta authorized a contract with Bangkok-based
    Pacific Overseas Air Service, POAS, to provide semi-regular air
    services between the Republic and Siam. With two heavy-lift car-
    go aircraft linking besieged Jogjakarta with the outside world,
    the Republic could devote more resources to guerrilla harass-
    ment of Dutch positions and the ongoing diplomatic struggles
    for international recognition.
          The contract between the Republic and an aviation com-
    pany legally established in Siam indicated that widespread for-
    mal recognition of the Republic of Indonesia might be within
    our grasp. The aviation authorities of The Philippines and Siam,
    along with the British colonial authorities in Burma, Singapore,
    and Labuan, sensibly placed a higher priority on commercial,
    not political, concerns by granting landing, refueling, and other
    rights to aircraft destined for Republican territory. When giving
    departure clearance for such a flight, controllers would duti-
    fully inform the pilot that the Dutch required them to land at
    Batavia for customs and immigration clearance. Few complied,
198                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
though they maintained radio contact with the regional air-traffic
control center in Singapore, as did Republican pilots flying be-
tween Jogjakarta and Bukittinggi.
     This sent the Batavia government into paroxysms of annoy-
ance. Protests to regional governments were met with the diplo-
matic equivalent of a shrug. When the issue was raised during
discussions on the USS Renville, our side admonished the Dutch
negotiators to “stop meddling in our internal affairs”.
     One evening in Bukittinggi, I listened to Cobley accuse
Bob of exaggerating his blood-curdling tales of blockade runs
to scare others off his turf. If anything, Bob downplayed the
real dangers caused by treacherous physical conditions and
inadequate support facilities.
     And far from amassing a fortune, Bob was often owed large
sums. From the first mission to Manila, where he shared our mea-
ger meals of Madras curry while waiting to sell our quinine, Bob
never complained about conditions or the lack of payment. No
load was too heavy, no route too dangerous, for “the notorious
Bob Freeberg” to refuse a mission.
     Perhaps Cobley’s rant was partially fueled by envy. Because
of his exceptional piloting skills, and his panache as he thumbed
his nose at a major colonial power, Bob Freeberg stood head and
shoulders above the rest of the Aviation Brotherhood. In press re-
ports and in casual conversation, Bob was often described as a mer-
cenary. In my opinion, this is incorrect. None of the Aviation Broth-
erhood were mercenaries in the formal sense of the term: someone
who fights for a foreign power in exchange for money. On the other
hand, many were borderline criminals who would fly any cargo or
passenger for a fee, regardless of legal or ethical considerations.
     Operating what was essentially an airborne truck or bus, Bob
was completely legitimate in our eyes: a civilian supplier under
contract to the military. RI-002 transported only bona fide goods:
                           BLACK FLIGHTS                              199
    agricultural commodities, automotive and radio spare parts, food
    and medicine. While the Dutch struggled to portray Bob as a law-
    less blockade runner, our victories against Dutch legal challenges
    in Manila, Bangkok, and Singapore proved that no one, besides
    the authorities in Batavia, considered Bob to be a criminal.
          Nevertheless, Bob faced as much peril as any front-line in-
    fantryman. Starting in January 1948, RI-002 was on the hit list
    of Dutch air patrols with authorization to use deadly force. The
    risks we took to avoid those patrols: landings on rugged airfields
    in near darkness, flying with extra loads and through treacher-
    ous tropical weather, pushed Bob's extraordinary ability (and his
    equally extraordinary luck) to the limit.
          Bob now faced even more risk as the precarious financial
    and security situation forced us to take desperate measures to
    survive as a nation. The intransigent attitude of officials in Bata-
    via was a clear warning that Dutch troops might soon pour over
    the Van Mook line and overrun Republican territories in Java.
    Our leadership therefore decided to transfer most of our na-
    tional assets to safer locations.
          One of the Republic's most valuable assets was also the
    most controversial: ten tons of pure opium. Like the British in
    China, the Dutch colonial administration had supported a vig-
    orous opium trade throughout the Nineteenth Century. As with
    essential commodities such as salt, tobacco, and sugar, the
    Dutch had maintained a monopoly on the opium trade. They
    dealt harshly with unlicensed traders to safeguard this lucra-
    tive source of domestic revenue.
          The stockpile Bob was asked to relocate was a legacy of
    those days. The opium was truly a treasure: ten tons would be
    worth a fortune when processed into medicinal morphine. But the
    Republic did not have the facilities to produce pharmaceutical-
    grade morphine, and no licensed factory abroad would accept a
200                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
shipment from the still-unrecognized Republic of Indonesia. So,
until the day our Republic formally joined the community of na-
tions, our opium was considered to be a clandestine horde of a
Class I narcotic in the hands of a criminal gang. Bob knew that
he was running the real risk of life imprisonment as a major drug
smuggler should RI-002 be intercepted while carrying a large
quantity of this valuable cargo.
      I began to worry about my friend. Bob was only twenty-
seven, but seemed haggard, aged far beyond his years from the
ceaseless demands of his work for the Republic, and his own per-
sonal financial and legal difficulties. His blond hair was already
showing streaks of gray, and his once-ample frame had shrunk
with dramatic loss of weight. Like his overworked and under-
maintained Dakota, Bob was in dire need of repair.
      Perhaps this unrelenting mental and physical strain contrib-
uted to our most serious disagreement. During one run to Manila,
the Republican treasury gave me a small bag of precious gems to
fund the purchase of side arms for the air group under my com-
mand. I did not tell Bob about the plan, and secreted the jewels in
a hidden compartment of the Dakota's crew deck before passing
through customs inspection. The contraband would be covertly
retrieved that night by members of the Philippine Armed Forces
Intelligence Branch, who would also be supplying the weapons I
would bring back to Jogjakarta.
      This plan had to be kept absolutely secret. After the incident
with Captain Espina, both our governments took great pains to
hide the continued support that Manila was giving to Jogjakarta.
With the United States still taking the side of the Dutch, and the
Philippines dependent on the United States, leaked evidence of
clandestine cooperation between the two new Republics might
have grave diplomatic consequences.
                          BLACK FLIGHTS                              201
           I decided that Bob should not be informed. Of course, I did
     not distrust my friend, but his housemates were another matter.
     I was convinced that they were scarcely more than criminals. I
     could not risk Bob unwittingly letting out the secret to his friends,
     who might easily pass it on to American diplomats or the press
     in exchange for money or favors.
           But you cannot keep a secret from a captain. Bob returned to
     RI-002 the following morning and was instantly aware that some-
     one had rummaged around his beloved Dakota the previous night.
     He angrily confronted me. I was forced to explain the presence of
     the jewels. However I did not wish to disparage his housemates to
     his face, so I invented another reason for keeping him in the dark.
          “The jewels were entrusted to me by my government,” I said.
    “They are my sole responsibility. This has nothing to do with you.”
          “Damn you, Muharto! It has everything to do with me! I'm
     the captain—responsible for whatever happens on my ship, what-
     ever she carries. If you get caught, I also go to jail!”
202                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      24
      BERSIAP
      —
      JA KA RTA
      April - May 1998
After my disappointing brush-off in New York, I abandoned my
quest to solve the mystery of RI-002. It is said that while intel-
ligence is the ability to learn, wisdom is the realization that some
things can never be known. After almost a decade of investigation,
I finally admitted to myself that the fate of Bob Freeberg might
be such an unsolvable mystery.
      Besides, I now had more pressing matters demanding my at-
tention: the economic well-being of myself and my family. When
I returned to Indonesia in July 1997, I found a nation in the
midst of financial disaster, brought to its knees by the region-
wide economic collapse triggered by currency speculators. That
month, Indonesia's fragile rupiah began a precipitous slide from
2.500 to the US dollar into the five-digit range, before recovering
to 8.000 to the dollar by February 1998. At the time, many sec-
tors of Indonesian commerce were over-dependent on imported
goods and services. With the plummeting of the rupiah, these in-
puts became too expensive to sustain normal business activities.
A wave of shutdowns and bankruptcies (including the forced
closures of under-capitalized banks) threw many Indonesians
into severe financial distress.
                                BERSIAP                              203
           Millions suffered as the price of basic necessities skyrocketed.
    Fortunately, wise investments and generous pensions remained suf-
    ficient to provide a comfortable life for Ani and myself, and none
    of my four children were among the tens of thousands of middle-
    class professionals who lost their jobs as whole industries collapsed.
    As the crisis deepened, I noticed bizarre parallels between mod-
    ern Jakarta and revolutionary Jogjakarta. But there was one key
    difference. In 1948 Jogjakarta, everyone, from senior officials to
    farmers, suffered equally, subsisting on simple meals of rice and
    soy cake, wearing whatever items of apparel they could find, even
    if little more than rags. However, in 1998 Jakarta, life was un-
    changed at the highest levels of society. Many of the great Indo-
    nesian fortunes are based on petroleum, mining, or forestry—ex-
    port commodities that generated skyrocketing revenues in rupiah
    terms as the currency collapsed. Even as millions descended into
    a desperate poverty, the elites maintained their opulent lifestyles,
    oblivious to a growing discontent.
           During these months of turmoil I discreetly continued my
    spiritual practices. These pursuits were not intended to solve the
    puzzling mystery of RI-002 and other worldly matters. Ani dis-
    approved of these activities as a “waste of time” and I had long
    honored her wishes. Now, however, my meditations and other
    activities had a practical purpose. As is customary for a Javanese
    gentleman of a certain age, I was preparing myself for the in-
    evitable meeting with my creator.
           However, I was plunged back into worldly affairs when I was
    invited to a wedding reception celebrating the union of two promi-
    nent families. I was acquainted with a significant portion of the three
    thousand guests at this top-tier gathering. As I circulated, I discov-
    ered that the two most popular topics of conversation were the ru-
    mors of previous escapades of the ostensibly virginal bride and the
    egregious corruption of President Soeharto’s family and friends.
204                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Many of the older guests had served with former Lieutenant-
Colonel Soeharto, including one venerable gentleman who had par-
ticipated in the fabled Dawn Raid of the first day of March 1949,
two months after Dutch troops had invaded Jogjakarta and impris-
oned most of the Republican government. Soeharto had skillfully
infiltrated troops into occupied Jogjakarta, routing the few (thor-
oughly astounded) defenders. The troops held the city for six hours
until mechanized reinforcements arrived, then vanished back into
the hinterland. This demonstration that the Republic, even with our
political leaders in detention, was still capable of mounting a disci-
plined and effective military action helped to garner increased in-
ternational support, bringing us many giant steps closer to realizing
our dream of uniting the entire archipelago as a sovereign nation.
      Memories of his outstanding leadership during our struggle
made the subsequent transformation into godfather to a gang
of crony capitalists and paterfamilias of a rapacious brood all
the more disheartening. A significant percentage of the wedding
guests owed their position and prosperity, directly or indirectly,
to Soeharto. In private conversation many of us refer to Soeharto
as the “sultan”, a nod to absolute monarchies of the past where
the ruler was the unquestioned authority who exerted total con-
trol over every aspect of society. In my opinion, Soeharto's sys-
tem of government, the New Order, has more similarity to the
colonial system of ruling through native elites. Like a Dutch
governor-general dispensing the rights to tax and otherwise ex-
ploit the local inhabitants to provincial nobles, Soeharto granted
commercial monopolies to trusted relatives and allies in a strat-
egy to maintain social stability while promoting rapid economic
growth in his fractious archipelago.
      Unfortunately, since the functioning of the New Order sys-
tem was based on blind obedience to the “sultan”, political or
civil-society activity could be no more than a charade. The most
                                BERSIAP                                205
    dismal example was the choreographed political theater that had
    played out a few weeks before the wedding, resulting in Soehar-
    to’s seventh five-year term as president. The Indonesian people
    had only theoretical input into the process. Soeharto was actually
    elected by the People's Consultative Assembly, or MPR, a body
    consisting of representatives of political parties, social organiza-
    tions, and the military. In our political system, voting is consid-
    ered to be an admission of defeat. Instead, we arrive at a consen-
    sus through discussion, as a group of neighbors might come to an
    agreement on practical village matters. This can be an exhausting
    process, and not free of coercion and veiled threats, but on this
    occasion no discussion was necessary. No other candidates had
    dared to challenge Soeharto, so he was chosen by acclamation.
          My good friend Alex Kawilarang also attended. After we had
    both fulfilled our social obligations to the wedding party and those
    guests of our acquaintance, we retired to the open bar which had
    been set up in a hallway near a side door to the ballroom so that
    devout Muslim guests (who believe that their faith prohibits the
    consumption of alcoholic beverages) would not be offended by the
    sight of Christians like Alex or moderate Muslims like myself sam-
    pling the premium brands of cognac and spirits supplied by our
    generous host. There, out of earshot, we shared our scathing con-
    tempt for most of the guests filling the opulent ballroom.
          Uneducated and uncivilized, often only a generation re-
    moved from the rice-field mud, they had achieved wealth and
    power through obeisances to the “sultan” rather than through
    their own ability or accomplishments.
          Of course, not all are undeserving of their wealth. Some
    would have prospered even without Soeharto’s royal patronage.
    Alex, for example, could have used his exceptional management
    skills to build a thriving business as Indonesia’s economy boomed
    under the New Order government without recourse to high-level
206                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
favors. But that was not to be. Shortly after the transfer of sover-
eignty, Alex was given command of the eastern region of Indone-
sia, where KNIL troops remained active in defiance of the Dutch
capitulation. Soeharto, then a lieutenant-colonel directly subordi-
nate to Alex, was stationed in Makassar in Sulawesi. Alex flew to
Makassar upon learning that Soeharto’s troops had fled the city
in response to a KNIL attack. Furious at the display of cowardice
toward a rag-tag force of rogue troops, Alex confronted Soeharto
and, according to legend, slapped him across the face in anger. Alex
neither confirms nor denies this story: he has no clear memory of
what he considers to have been a minor incident of reprimanding a
subordinate for the substandard performance of his troops.
      Soeharto, on the other hand, forgets nothing. Years later, as
president he would refuse to approve a business deal that would
have assured Alex and his family the comfortable life befitting
such an honored son of the nation. However, Soeharto was gener-
ous enough to permit Alex’s son to work as a well-paid executive
for one of his own son’s companies.
     After trading stories of the venality or stupidity of certain
other guests, we turned our discussion to a serious topic: the con-
tinuing round of on-campus student protests. The government
and military were quick to condemn the students for their vocal
protestations and calls for direct elections (or at least a credible
challenge to Soeharto). But many of our generation were reluc-
tant to fault the students for their enthusiasm. We still remem-
bered the crucial role that courageous students had played at all
stages of our struggle for independence and our early years of
nationhood. From the coffee chats of medical students in Batavia
that sparked the beginnings of national consciousness, the youth
congress that called for “one nation, one people, one language”,
the teenage warriors of the revolution, and even the activist uni-
versity students whose demonstrations helped bring Soeharto to
                              BERSIAP                                207
    power in the Nineteen Sixties, Indonesian youth had been at the
    forefront of political change. Alex and I looked around the opu-
    lent ballroom, packed wall-to-wall with an over-privileged elite
    casually dismissing the passionate convictions of young people on
    the city streets, and wondered what the next months would bring.
          Alex then asked a favor. A longtime acquaintance had ap-
    proached him to seek assistance for his daughter, a university stu-
    dent, regarding some serious personal matter. Alex volunteered
    no details, other than cryptic comments that he could not become
    involved because of his “position”, and that my “Javanese mystic
    abilities” might be of some use. I was intrigued by my friend's
    uncharacteristic reticence, and agreed to help in any way I could.
          A few days afterward, a young woman appeared at my door.
    It was Maria, the daughter of the friend whom Alex had asked me
    to assist in such a mysterious fashion. Over tea, Ani, Maria, and I
    engaged in polite small talk. In this situation, where someone calls
    upon a person of greater age or higher social position, Javanese
    etiquette mandates that we make pleasant small talk until the host
    invites the guest to state the purpose of their visit. After a few min-
    utes of pleasantries I did hint to Maria that she should get down to
    business. However, she continued to talk of inconsequential mat-
    ters, genuinely reluctant to broach the subject of her concern. Final-
    ly, Ani adopted a forthright tone and told Maria to speak her mind.
          Maria told us that she was worried about a friend, a student
    at another university, who had inexplicably vanished the previ-
    ous week. As she described her friend, whose name was Aldi, it
    became clear that the young man in question was, in fact, her
    boyfriend. Like most young lovers, they met or communicated
    daily. Maria showed us what I understood to be a current fash-
    ion accessory, an electronic pager, explaining that she and Aldi
    used the device to communicate by short text messages, since
    they studied at different campuses and lived some distance apart.
208                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
 However, Aldi had not sent her a message since the previous
 week, though she continued to “text” him, as she put it, several
 times each day. Maria also telephoned Aldi’s parents, who lived
 in another city. They told Maria that they had also not commu-
 nicated with their son for more than a week. However, they as-
 sured her, this was not uncommon.
       Many young Indonesian men are not averse to breaking off
 a relationship in this callous manner. I saw Ani draw a breath,
 preparing to inform Maria that she probably faced a spell of
 heartbreak. But before Ani could speak, Maria revealed that she
 had visited Aldi’s campus after several days of pager silence. One
 of Aldi’s instructors told her that he had been absent from the
 campus since the day the messages to Maria had abruptly ceased.
 Furthermore, she learned that two of his friends had also van-
 ished. Like Aldi, they were organizers of student protests. Ani and
 I looked at Maria's pretty face, now clouded with concern, and
 realized that this was far more serious than a teenage romance
 gone bad. In all probability, Aldi had been disappeared.
       Maria was in obvious distress, so Ani invited her to join us
 for a light meal. As we ate, Ani encouraged Maria to talk about
 her career plans, a ploy intended to take her mind from her boy-
 friend’s unknown fate. Maria told us that she was an avid reader,
 and believed that widespread literacy is the best hope of the In-
 donesian people. To this end, she was pursuing a degree in library
 science and historical documentation. Maria had just been ac-
 cepted as an intern at the National Library, assisting a visiting
 foreign scholar who was compiling a comprehensive catalog of
 historical Javanese-language manuscripts. Maria told us that the
 scholar was teaching her to use a new resource, which she called
 the “Internet”, as an aid to their work.
      As Maria struggled to explain to us such arcane matters as
“news-group threads” and “keyword searches”, I saw in her eyes a
                               BERSIAP                               209
    passionate conviction I had seldom witnessed since the early days
    of our Republic. Four decades ago in Jogjakarta, Maria might
    have taught school with one textbook and a few scraps of paper
    shared among all her pupils. Now, Maria and her generation have
    vastly more resources at their disposal, but I could see in her eyes
    and expression the same passion to effect change.
         Maria’s contagious enthusiasm encouraged me to relate
    my own adventures in the libraries and archives investigating
    the mystery of RI-002. I showed her my folders of photographs,
    newspaper clippings, and documents, including the declassified
    American dispatches suggesting that Bob had been secretly cap-
    tured by the Dutch. I raised my eyes from the document binder
    and saw Maria staring at me, her face etched with lines of worry
    for her beloved. I thought of my own dear friend, perhaps de-
    cades ago similarly held incommunicado in a military prison. If
    Bob had been captured, he had almost certainly perished in de-
    tention. Maria and I shared, but did not voice, the fear that Aldi
    might meet the same dismal fate.
210                        ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      25
      PILOTING
      A DESK
      —
      JO G JAKARTA
      May 1948
In May 1948 I was reminded that the Air Force is a military
organization, not a flying club, when I was transferred out of
the RI-002 cockpit. In recognition of my blockade-running ex-
ploits (and the critical lack of capable administrators to man-
age the rapidly expanding force). I was promoted to Major
and assigned to a desk in Maguwo.
     Though my days as a dashing blockade runner were over, I
looked forward to a new adventure: married life. Ani and I cel-
ebrated our akhad nikah, engagement ceremony, and our families
set the wedding date for 24 October 1948. Like me, Ani is the
offspring of a (now former) official in the colonial government.
While our formal position is gone, our social status remains in-
tact: our impending union called for an endless round of ritual
functions to which I devoted most of my off-duty hours.
     We were now an independent nation in large part because
Soekarno believed that we should seize the opportunity presented
by the surrender of the Japanese, rather than wait until all of the
preparations to administer a sovereign nation had been complet-
ed. Soekarno wryly compared the diffidence of some nationalist
leaders to leap into independence with that of a high official who
                          PILOTING A DESK                           211
    would not marry unless he could offer his wife a fully furnished
    brick house complete with an electric oven and spring bed. Soek-
    arno exhorted his fellow leaders to follow the example of Marhaen,
    a farmer who dared take a bride though possessing only an earth-
    floored wooden hut containing a straw mat and a cooking pot.
          I was fully prepared to follow Marhaen’s example and usher
    Ani into a home furnished with only a cooking pot—except there
    were no pots to be found in all of Jogjakarta. Eighteen months
    into the blockade, even the most mundane domestic necessities
    were prohibitively expensive or simply unavailable. No longer
    able to shop freely in foreign ports, now I had to scrounge around
    like everyone else to set up a proper home for a married couple.
          I was not alone in my privations. The population swelled
    as refugees continued to flood into Jogjakarta, transforming the
    Republican capital into a microcosm of the entire archipelago.
    An early evening walk down Jalan Malioboro, the main street
    of the town, flanked by government buildings and leading to the
    Sultan’s palace, would present an intriguing mix of facial features,
    body types, dress, and language. Foreigners were well represent-
    ed: European civilians, including Dutch journalists, freely came
    and went, along with a number of foreign sympathizers providing
    much-needed advice, technical skills, and overseas contacts.
          A major provision of the Renville agreement, signed in
    March, was the relocation of the army’s formidable Siliwangi Di-
    vision, then stationed in Bandung, to Republican territory. Sud-
    denly, our over-crowded, under-nourished capital had to contend
    with tens of thousands of new soldiers.
          The Siliwangi soldiers camped outside of town comprised
    only a portion of armed men in Jogjakarta. The streets were filled
    with civilian militiamen, some carrying no more than a small
    knife, others with antique handguns in their waistbands. The fol-
212                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
lowers of Bung Tomo, the demagogue whose fiery calls to violence
helped spark the massacre at Surabaya, were readily distinguish-
able: all promised not to cut their hair until Indonesia was free.
      Many of the militias were composed of refugees from Dutch-
controlled areas in the Outer Islands, demonstrating loyalty to a
Republic that spread far beyond Java and Sumatra. However, we
had mixed feelings about one set of “foreign” warriors: Dutch
army soldiers who had deserted and joined our cause. All were
recent conscripts, untrained and unwilling, who had endured
years of wartime occupation only to be forced to abandon their
homes and sail halfway around the globe to fight yet another
war. Though each deserter meant one fewer enemy soldier, our
ingrained traditions of national and military loyalty kept many of
us from fully accepting these “traitors” into our hearts.
      But this was not the case with some colonial-forces deserters.
More than 600 soldiers in the British Indian Army, all ethnic Mus-
lims, defected en masse, bringing their firearms, ammunition, and
supplies with them. Conscripts recruited from the Dutch colonies
of Suriname and Ghana also soon realized who they should be
fighting for and defected to the Republic. After our independence
was fully achieved, each defector from a colonized area was re-
warded with Indonesian citizenship and granted either a parcel of
land in a farming area or gainful employment in a town so they
could build a life of freedom and dignity in the nation they had
helped to bring into existence.
      My promotion and relocation to headquarters was not with-
out regret. Bob and I had not spoken of the incident with the
gems I smuggled into Manila, and the atmosphere in the cockpit
was decidedly frosty during my final missions with RI-002. My
reassignment took away any opportunity I might have for a rec-
onciliation. Bob spent little time in Jogjakarta, and even when he
was there, I was too busy with the demands of my new job and
my wedding-related social obligations to seek him out.
                          PILOTING A DESK                            213
Pe t i t M u h a r t o a nd Ani
on t h e i r e n g a gement in
M ay 1 9 4 8
        214                     ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Though I lost one friend, I gained another. Alex Kawilarang was
a Lieutenant Colonel commanding a crack Siliwangi brigade now
stationed in Jogjakarta. I met Alex when he called on me at Maguwo,
seeking my assistance in liaising with foreign blockade runners to
organize arms shipments. Our colonial-school educations and other
common interests led to long chats in warung kopi (open-air coffee
stalls that are the traditional social gathering places for Indonesian
villagers) about the progress and direction of our revolution.
      Our revolution was far more than a straightforward strug-
gle against an oppressive foreign regime. The Dutch strategy of
divide-and-conquer had been used to encourage nobles to exploit
the farmers in their ancestral territories and ethnic Chinese entre-
preneurs to monopolize distribution channels at the expense of
indigenous merchants. This had created deep divisions based on
religion and ethnicity. Now, leaders of various factions exploited
these divisions to gain influence, even as the moderate nationalists
led by Soekarno and Hatta strove to unify the archipelago.
      One such movement contributed to an unintended side-
effect of the relocation of the Siliwangi Division to Jogjakarta.
During the Japanese occupation, a charismatic mystic named
Sekarmadji Maridjan Kartosuwirjo took advantage of Japanese
efforts to establish native militias to assemble his own corps of
fearsome guerrillas. This group, who eventually called themselves
the Hizbullah Mujahideen, became one of Indonesia's most effec-
tive and feared bands of freedom fighters, working closely with
other militias and Siliwangi's own units to harass Dutch positions.
      Kartosuwirjo rejected any form of accommodation with the
Dutch infidels, and regarded the move to Jogjakarta as a betrayal.
Hizbullah would continue to mount effective guerrilla raids, but
their goal was no longer a sovereign nation of Indonesia. They
were now fighting to establish their own dream: a medieval ca-
liphate encompassing all Muslim-majority areas of Southeast Asia.
                            PILOTING A DESK                            215
          Alex was also concerned about the activities of socialist and
    communist organizations, who were rejecting any form of nego-
    tiation with the Dutch. We laughed when I told him of being ac-
    cused of being a communist agent after the death of the unfor-
    tunate Ining, but we both knew that communists were making
    significant inroads into our military, including the Air Force.
          We could only hope that Soekarno and Hatta would keep us
    on the middle road, navigating through the shoals of communism
    on one side and Islamism on the other, toward a future as a vi-
    able and stable independent state.
216                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
                Soldie rs from t he R e p ub lican
                A r my ’s Siliw angi Div is ion in
                Jogjak ar t a June 1948
PILOTING A DESK                            217
          26
          INDOS
          —
          JA K A RTA
          June 1998
    Honoring my promise to Ani to refrain from my spiritual practices,
    I sought information about Maria’s missing lover by contacting a
    more worldly (though perhaps equally uncanny) being: a military
    intelligence officer of my long acquaintance. I gave him the name
    of Maria’s friend, and he returned my call a few hours later to
    deny that the military had been in any way responsible for the dis-
    appearance of the young man. However, the manner in which he
    wrapped his denial in dense layers of allusion and circumlocution
    was, to my Javanese ears, clear confirmation that Aldi had been
    kidnapped by military operatives, but remained alive.
          I telephoned Maria with this guardedly optimistic news, and
    invited her to visit us again. Both Ani and I enjoyed the company
    of this intelligent and vivacious young woman, and were more
    than willing to lend her emotional support during this difficult
    time. Maria did visit again a few days afterward, and we discussed
    my abandoned quest to solve the mystery of Bob Freeberg and
    RI-002. Maria suggested I expand my search beyond newspapers
    and government documents to other sources, such as personal
    memoirs. She offered to help by using the technical resources she
218                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
was now learning to master to identify books by Dutch politicians,
military officers, and civilians who had lived in the Netherlands
Indies or had visited during the immediate post-war years.
      During the following weeks, Maria frequently appeared at
our door bearing one or more obscure volumes, some of which
she had tracked down in private libraries. Such was Maria’s
charm that she convinced these collectors to let her borrow some
of their prized possessions. She also made some “undocumented
loans” from the National Library reference collection.
      I regarded the growing stack of books piled on the table be-
side my favorite reading chair. Even in retirement, the social and
other demands on my time would prevent me from perusing these
volumes in search of clues to the enduring mystery of RI-002.
However, fate would soon provide me with all the time I needed.
      On the evening of 12 May 1998, Ani and I watched in horror
as a television newscaster burst into tears while reading a report
that four students had been shot and killed during an anti-govern-
ment demonstration that afternoon.
     “Is this what has become of our revolution?” I thought. Fifty
years ago, we were fighting and dying to build a nation where our
children could live in freedom. Now the military operatives of that
nation were shooting our grandchildren in the streets like dogs.
      Following Indonesian custom, the fallen students were buried
the following morning, the ceremonies attracting thousands of sup-
porters. After the funerals, activists and well-wishers gathered on
the campus of Trisakti University, scene of the previous day's tragic
events. By mid-afternoon, however, hundreds of scruffy young men,
representatives of the rural masses that middle-class Indonesians
pity, despise, and fear, had gathered on adjacent roads, hurling
rocks and bottles at the ranks of riot police near the campus.
      This was the vanguard of a much larger force recruited from
the hard-scrabble villages of western Java and southern Sumatra.
                               INDOS                                  219
    That night, scores of trucks transported these gangs to Jakarta,
    setting the stage for a horrific day of rape and pillage. By noon
    on 14 May, Jakarta was paralyzed. From my vantage point in a
    southern suburb I could see plumes of smoke rising from several
    downtown districts. Rioters and looters ran free until army troops
    finally appeared late in the afternoon. Throughout the evening,
    television stations broadcast searing images of burned-out stores
    and lines of looters, shirt-less for easy identification, carrying their
    stolen property as evidence as they were marched into detention.
          Reports of marauding gangs in a neighboring suburb was
    enough to keep me at home during subsequent days. I turned to
    the pile of books beside my reading chair. My first choice was the
    memoir by an Indo woman of her experiences during the Japa-
    nese occupation. In doing so, I was taken back to a time of such
    horror that the events of past days seemed mild in comparison.
    But the horror was not of her time in a Japanese prison: the true
    horror only began after her release.
          She and her children had been imprisoned in a camp in
    western Java; her husband in another, men-only camp. When the
    gates were thrown open after the Japanese surrender, she had
    left her children in the care of a fellow inmate and walked to her
    home in Bandung, which her family had owned for two genera-
    tions. She was not sure where her husband had been imprisoned
    (or if he was even still alive), so she felt that her best option
    would be to wait at their house and hope he would appear.
          At the house she was confronted by an Indonesian fam-
    ily who had taken up residence during their absence and had
    no intention of vacating the premises. Her only option was to
    return to the camp. There, with mounting anxiety, she shel-
    tered with her children, relying on their despised Japanese
    guards to protect them from the newly armed and emboldened
    youth gangs who roamed the streets.
220                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
       And so began a period in our history that, to this day,
 brings me great shame. The Dutch have a name for this time:
“Bersiap” (“get ready”), from the rallying cry of the militias and
 roving bands of youths responsible for most of the violence. In
 most areas, the gangs, armed with bambu runcing, machetes and
 other basic weapons, sought revenge on local elites despised for
 their history of aiding and abetting Dutch exploitation. They
 also clashed with those Japanese troops who had remained in
 urban centers, and with native colonial army soldiers who were
 regrouping in expectation of the return of their Dutch officers.
       Our leaders strove to control the growing anarchy, but ap-
 peals to reason and moderation were drowned out by a fren-
 zied demagoguery. One day in October 1945, I sat in front of
 a radio set and listened, appalled, at the strident exhortations
 of a militia leader in Surabaya calling for violence against not
 only Dutch and British forces, but Eurasian, Chinese, and even
Ambonese residents of the city. That irresponsible rabble-rous-
 ing would lead to the massacre of Surabaya, a tragic demon-
 stration of the failure of the Republican leaders to control the
 forces sweeping the new nation.
       The arrival of Dutch troops in significant numbers in early
1946 brought the situation under control. The establishment
 of a Republican capital in Jogjakarta helped to foster formal
 administrative structures in Republican territories in Java and
 Sumatra, curbing the excesses of the militias. In the rest of
 the archipelago, which had seen relatively little violence, local
 elites worked with the Dutch to keep order, even as many de-
 clared support for the Republic.
       But the damage had been done. A thread running through
 the memoirs was the growing rift between the progressive fac-
 tions calling for independence and those steadfastly opposed to
 ceding control over their beloved “emerald islands”. Reading
                               INDOS                               221
    the memoirs, I was struck by a manifest and genuine love for
    Indonesia. For the Indos, those Dutch people born in the Indies,
    the colony was not a mining camp or oil field where they came
    only to exploit and make money—it was their home. Many fami-
    lies could trace their residence in the archipelago for generations:
    even a few to the days of the Spice Trade. I thought back to my
    school days. My teachers, for the most part, lived here perma-
    nently and had a profound love for the land, a love they tried to
    instill in us, the future leaders of the native population.
          But that paternalistic love left no room for self-determina-
    tion. The Dutch described their colonial subjects, not always out
    of earshot of Dutch-speaking natives such as myself, as “half
    child half devil”. In transforming a plantation colony into a
    modern nation we have clearly demonstrated that the myth of
    an “innocent, child-like native” was no more than a demeaning
    racist canard. But as I watched replays of footage of the burn-
    ing buildings, and heard the stories of mass rapes and other
    atrocities, I wondered if the Indonesian people still harbored
    demons they needed to exorcise.
222                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
       27
       NOT READY FOR
       AIRPLANES
       —
       J O G JA K A RTA — B U K I T T I N G G I
       May – July 1948
By May 1948, after a year of non-stop operational abuse, RI-002
was falling apart. Dave Fowler, the pilot of the POAS Dakota
that was providing a much-needed second reliable connection be-
tween the Republic and regional capitals in addition to the over-
worked RI-002, told me of watching the port landing gear of the
Dakota buckle and pitch a wing to the ground as Bob fired up the
engines for takeoff from Bukittinggi. Bob had followed his usual
practice of pulling the locking pins from the landing-gear hydrau-
lics far earlier than recommended.
      “Ninety-nine times out of a hundred you can get away with it,”
Bob used to say. Obviously, this had been the hundredth time. No
real damage had been done: Dakotas are the “pickup trucks” of the
sky, able to withstand levels of abuse that would consign most other
aircraft to a lengthy stay in a maintenance hangar. Using nothing
but muscle power and piles of wooden beams, a gang of workmen
righted the air frame. Bobby spent the rest of the day repairing the
landing gear, then walked on the wing to confirm that the new warps
and cracks on the skin of the wing did not pose a flight danger.
      The following morning, Bob was ready for another try. Howev-
er, a night of rain had turned the airstrip into a morass of mud. Dave
                         NOT READY FOR AIRPLANES                       223
Pre s i d e n t S o e k a rno t o uring
Su m a t ra i n RI -0 0 2 d uring
J u ne 1 9 4 8
      224                               ONE MAN AIR FORCE
Fowler told me how he shook his head in disbelief as RI-002 slipped
along the sodden track, throwing up twin rooster tails of mud from
the spinning wheels that exploded into mist from the propeller back-
wash. Perilously close to the end of the airstrip, the Dakota finally
struggled skyward and disappeared into the leaden sky.
      When Bob was contracted as the Republic’s first dedicated
aerial blockade runner, I had convinced Suryadarma to register
his Dakota as RI-002 in order to reserve the call sign RI-001 for
a future presidential airplane. A year later, we all realized that
now was the time to paint that prestigious call sign on an actual
aircraft, if only to provide a getaway vehicle for senior officials in
the likely event of a Dutch invasion of Jogjakarta.
      Soekarno knew that his best chance of raising sufficient
funds to purchase the future RI-001 would be in Sumatra, the
expansive island that comprised (outside of a few small Dutch
enclaves) the bulk of the land area of the Republic. The Dutch
blockade had not greatly affected the economy of the resource-
rich island, and regional leaders had generously contributed to
fund-raising efforts in the past, including the purchase of two
Avro-Anson twin-engine aircraft.
      This would be Soekarno’s first journey outside of Java as
president. The United Nations offered to supply an aircraft and
crew so Soekarno and entourage could make the exhausting tour
in comfort. A generous gesture, to be sure, though I am certain
that the primary purpose was to provide an opportunity for their
representatives to directly observe the level of support the Re-
public enjoyed in outlying areas.
      I soon learned of the plan to raise money to purchase a presi-
dential airplane, and casually mentioned it to Bambang Saptoadji
during morning coffee on the Hotel Tugu terrace. He immediately
declared his personal ambition to become captain of the future
                      NOT READY FOR AIRPLANES                          225
    RI-001. I kept my tongue, knowing that Bambang, though a natu-
    ral aviator, was not even within shouting distance of gaining his
    captain's certificate for a Dakota.
          Bambang felt he was in the shadow of his fellow aviator, Moel-
    jono. They had been recruited within days of each other in early
    1946, and had had similar opportunities for training and flight ex-
    perience. But Bambang’s career had been dogged by bad luck. For
    months now he had brooded about missing the raid on Ambarrawa
    because of last-minute mechanical failure of his Hayabusa fighter,
    during which Moeljono had expertly piloted his Guntei light bomb-
    er to land a direct hit on a warehouse in the port of Semarang. Now
    he had more reason to be envious of his fellow aviator.
          Undeterred by the loss of the first Avro-Anson and the tragic
    deaths of Halim Perdanakusuma and Iswahyudi, Muhammad Hatta
    had successfully lobbied wealthy Sumatrans to purchase another
    twin-engine Avro Anson. This aircraft, designated RI-004, was deliv-
    ered to Bukittinggi by a British pilot, Wade Palmer, in March 1948.
          Suryadarma decided to relocate the craft to Maguwo.
    For this important task, he chose Moeljono, whose qualifica-
    tions for flying a twin-engine aircraft, like Bambang, consisted
    only of a few lessons from Bob in the cockpit of RI-002. None-
    theless, Moeljono flew RI-004 to Jogjakarta without inci-
    dent, to Bambang’s great annoyance.
          Bambang’s frustration only increased when Suryadarma de-
    cided it was unwise to have the first batch of pilots, who were
    trained on vintage Japanese biplanes, operating such complex air-
    craft without a thorough technical grounding. Instead, he waited
    for the pilot cadets that Bob and I had flown to Singapore to
    return from flight school in India with twin-engine certification,
    while Bambang sat at a desk and fumed.
          Bambang’s only hope lay in racking up enough hours in
    the right-hand seat of RI-002 to gain twin-engine certification
226                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
through hands-on experience. But that in itself might not be suf-
ficient. Bambang seemed to lack the sense (essential for the cap-
tain of any craft, air or sea) of taking full responsibility for every
aspect of operations. Bambang only concerned himself with his
specific duties as copilot, placing on Bob the added burden of
organizing logistics on the ground.
      For example, Bob’s flight schedule for the opium runs in-
volved leaving Maguwo at three a.m. and flying along the coasts
of Java and Sumatra to Bukittinggi. With characteristic skill and
courage, Bob navigated only by the dim outline of the Bukit Bari-
san mountains against the pre-dawn glow to the east in order to
be on the ground at his destination before the Dutch began their
dawn patrols. On the first such run after I had been transferred
back to my desk, Bob had waited in the cockpit of RI-002 un-
til well after dawn for Bambang and the other crew members.
When they finally appeared, joking and quite unaware of their
fault, Bob canceled the mission. As he stepped into the vehicle
that would take him back to town, Bob turned and said: “You
people are not ready for airplanes”.
      We all hoped that the Soekarno Tour might prove to the
world (if not to the Dutch) that we were a cohesive political entity.
Soekarno would be asking powerful leaders in lands a thousand
kilometers from the capital in Jogjakarta to make a concrete con-
tribution to the cause of independence by donating funds to buy
a future RI-001. Ignoring the recent misadventure in Bukittinggi,
President Soekarno demonstrated his mastery of the power of
symbolism by insisting that he fly on RI-002 instead of the United
Nations aircraft. He knew that arriving in provincial towns in an
aircraft that clearly belonged to the Republic (albeit on a rental
basis) would be a potent reminder of our commitment to achieve
nationhood with our own resources and on our own terms.
                     NOT READY FOR AIRPLANES                           227
          In the end, though, Soekarno thought it best to fly from Java
    to Bukittinggi on the United Nations aircraft, as a portion of the
    flight path was over Dutch territory. Otherwise, he proudly flew
    on RI-002. For a whole month, Bob pushed his piloting skills to
    the limit as he surmounted the vagaries of unpredictable weather,
    rugged landscapes, and the deteriorating condition of his Dakota
    to fly into isolated settlements, while never losing sight of his re-
    sponsibility to safeguard the Republican head of state.
          On one occasion, Boedi told me later, Soekarno had insisted
    that Bob set down on a pot-holed, overgrown airfield near the vil-
    lage of an important religious leader. Bob flew low over the field,
    decided that even his exceptional skill and great good luck had
    limits, and declared that a landing would be too risky. Soekarno
    would not hear of it and demanded:
         “I order you to land down there,” he said. “I am the president!”
         “With all due respect, sir,” the always-polite Bob replied, “down
    there, indeed, you are the president. But up here, I'm the captain!”
          Typically for Soekarno, at least in those years, this steadfast ad-
    herence to a captain's primary duty to protect his passengers and
    crew at all costs only increased Bob’s stature in his eyes. Often, while
    delivering a speech on an airstrip, Soekarno would point to Bob,
    seated in the cockpit or resting in the shade under a wing. Soekarno
    would say that Bob Freeberg’s willingness to support the struggle for
    freedom was proof that not all foreigners were colonial oppressors,
    and that the Republic of Indonesia had friends in the world.
          The climax of the trip came in Kutaraja, now the city of Banda
    Aceh at the northern tip of Sumatra. One intriguing facet of Aceh
    culture is that the women will wear the entire wealth of the family in
    the form of gold necklaces and other jewelry. The wealth is perfectly
    secure, as in this staunchly conservative region women only venture
    out of the house when accompanied by at least one male relative. At
    the event, Soekarno declared that he would not eat his dinner until
    he had received sufficient funds to purchase RI-001. The diners all
228                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
regarded each other, not knowing how to begin but also not willing
to disrespect their president by depriving him of his dinner. Then,
one of the older women stood, detached a strand of her necklace,
and placed it on the table in front of her. Others did the same. The
ice broken, male attendees approached Soekarno and either gave
cash or a solemn pledge to gift the money before he left. Soekarno
smiled and tucked into his dinner. In appreciation, RI-001 would be
named Seulawah, the Acehnese word meaning Golden Mountain.
      Mission accomplished, Bob delivered President Soekarno
and his entourage back to Bukittinggi, where they caught the
United Nations aircraft back to Jogjakarta. Soekarno would nev-
er forget the services rendered to the new Indonesian republic by
the young American pilot, in later years referring to him as: “That
dear boy, our friend Bob Freeberg”.
     When Bob himself returned to Jogjakarta from Bukittinggi
the following day, he was presented with a memo from Suryadar-
ma outlining his next mission. Bob had already decided that the
condition of RI-002, his own physical endurance, and perhaps
even his luck, were stretched to the limit. He planned to put the
sizable payment he expected for the Soekarno Tour to good use
by taking RI-002 to Manila for a complete overhaul.
      Boedi accompanied Bob to meet with Suryadarma. He told
me later that the meeting did not go well. Suryadarma considered
that granting the Dakota RI registration, though a legal fiction,
entitled the Air Force commander to complete control over the
aircraft. Bob did not share this view and demanded an immediate
cash payment and a load to take to Manila.
     Taken aback by this unprecedented display of assertiveness,
Suryadarma agreed to Bob’s demands. Boedi told me that as Bob
walked out of the office, Suryadarma looked at the American's
broad back passing through the doorway and muttered impre-
cations, calling Bob a londo, a derogatory Javanese idiom for
the despised Dutch colonialists.
                     NOT READY FOR AIRPLANES                         229
          28
          SENSITIVE
          THINGS
          —
          JA K A RTA
          June – July 1998
    In June 1988, with the victims of the May Riots buried and dam-
    aged buildings already being repaired or rebuilt, Indonesia was a
    nation in transition. Eight days after the riots, President Soeharto,
    his options exhausted, stepped down in favor of his vice-president
    and long-time protege B.J. Habibie. In the following weeks, the
    interim president, a western-educated technocrat, began the pro-
    cess of rolling back many of the excesses of the previous regime.
    As the military came under scrutiny and the press reveled in a
    new-found freedom, Indonesians celebrated the beginning of the
    Zaman Reformasi, the Era of Reform.
          I seldom ventured out during those weeks, preferring to
    spend most days in my favorite reading chair, working my way
    through the ever-growing pile of books on the side table. Maria
    visited often, and never empty handed. Besides scouring libraries
    for books that might help me in my research, Maria kept me in
    mind during her frequent visits to second-hand bookstores. She
    would purchase books she judged to be relevant to my research
    and refuse to be reimbursed, no matter how much I insisted.
          One afternoon I was engrossed in my reading when Maria
    appeared at the front door. Ani spoke to her for a moment, and
230                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
then both approached me: Maria’s face radiant and Ani smiling
broadly. Before I could rise from my chair to greet her, Maria
dropped to her knees in front of me and took my right hand in
hers, pressing my fingers to her forehead in the traditional Java-
nese expression of profound respect.
      I extracted my hand from her grip and asked for an expla-
nation. Maria replied that her missing boyfriend had been “re-
appeared” the previous day. I disclaimed any responsibility for
the joyous conclusion to her weeks of uncertainty and agony. I
knew from my own sources that many of the student organiz-
ers had returned to their families in relatively good shape. Oth-
ers, however, were still missing, and would remain so to this day.
None of the "reappeared" students, including Aldi, would reveal
details about their experience.
      The army was quick to blame rogue officers for the kidnap-
pings. This was typical. Whenever the top brass do not want to
take responsibility for human-rights abuses committed by their
soldiers or military operations that have spun out of control, they
put the blame on rogue officers acting outside of the chain of
command, as though their inability to control subordinates was a
perfectly valid excuse and not a damning admission of their own
incompetence as senior commanders.
      By coincidence, the book I had been reading when Maria ar-
rived was De Eenling, The Lone Wolf, a memoir of the most no-
torious rogue operative in Indonesian history: Captain Raymond
Pierre Paul Westerling. He is the bete noir of modern Indonesia.
Every schoolchild learns about how Westerling massacred tens of
thousands of brave soldiers and innocent civilians during our strug-
gle for freedom. But he would never face justice for those atrocities.
Westerling was smuggled out of Indonesia in January 1950, and the
Dutch consistently refused to extradite him, or to put him on trial
for war crimes. He died in 1987, unrepentant to the end.
                         SENSITIVE THINGS                              231
          Nicknamed Turk from a childhood spent in Istanbul as the
    son of a Greek mother married to an antiques dealer of Dutch
    ancestry, Westerling joined the Dutch Colonial Army after the
    Germans invaded The Netherlands, receiving officer training in
    England. Westerling did not see combat during the war itself, but
    quickly made up for his lost opportunities when he landed in Su-
    matra in September 1945, as part of a reconnaissance mission to
    investigate and report on conditions in the former colony. There,
    he witnessed some of the most brutal atrocities of the Bersiap pe-
    riod. The roving militias in the large port city of Medan had been
    especially brutal in the weeks after the revolution. As in other
    regions, the gangs targeted the Dutch colonials recently released
    from Japanese internment camps. In Medan, however, they also
    terrorized members of the local nobility, who were perceived as
    having oppressively exploited the common people for generations
    in the near-slavery conditions of rubber and coffee plantations. To
    Westerling, this persecution of both Europeans and Indonesians
    indicated simple mob-driven anarchy, not a political revolution
    with widespread popular support.
          In 1946, Captain Westerling was assigned to Sulawesi, where
    the semi-piratical Bugis seafarers hailing from the southern por-
    tion of the island had emerged as a disciplined and highly effective
    guerrilla force. After mounting a surprise attack on a military fa-
    cility, the guerrillas would disperse into scores of rural settlements,
    where they would hide in plain sight, indistinguishable from the
    fierce, life-toughened farmers and fisherman struggling to survive
    in their hard-scrabble villages.
          Westerling quickly made a name for himself by developing
    the Westerling Method of counter-insurgency. He assembled an
    elite corps of commandos, all fiercely loyal to the charismatic Turk,
    who would enter a village and herd all residents into an open
    area, separating the women and children from the men. Wester-
232                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
                 Cap t ain R ay m ond We s t e r ling
SENSITIVE THINGS                          233
    ling would carry with him a list of suspected terrorists, gathered
    earlier through informants. He would call a name and, once iden-
    tified, the man would be shot dead on the spot. Afterward, all
    present would have to swear on the Koran that they would not
    follow in the path of the terrorists.
          Westerling's Special Forces were proficient in eliminating
    captives who were inconvenient or a potential threat. The method
    was to free the captives or allow them to urinate in the bushes.
    When they were ten meters away, the troops would open up with
    machine gun fire. This type of summary justice was called: “let
    them take a walk”. I believe that a cousin of mine died at the
    hands of these notorious Special Troops in just this fashion.
          My cousin, Samudro "Sam" Samadikoen, was only 19 and
    served as an adjutant to Dr. Soepomo, Minister of Youth Affairs
    at the time of the Second Dutch Aggression. When Madiun was
    overrun in December 1948, Dr. Soepomo happened to be in that
    town on ministerial business. He took to the mountains with
    a small entourage, including Sam. They were all unarmed and
    moved around disguised like ordinary villagers. On the slope of
    Mount Wilis they encountered soldiers who recognized them as
    educated people, not villagers, by their white, clean teeth and lack
    of callouses on the soles of their feet. They were all summarily shot.
          Initially, Batavia turned a proverbial blind eye to the gory
    details of this strategy, as they did with similar massacres con-
    ducted by other units in Java and Sumatra. But as word leaked
    out, there were outraged calls for Westerling's own head from
    factions in his home country. Even those with little sympathy for
    the Republican cause took a dim view of wartime atrocities be-
    ing committed by their own troops so soon after the bitter expe-
    rience of Nazi occupation. Westerling was stripped of his com-
    mand in November 1948 and the Butcher of Makassar was for-
    mally discharged in January 1949.
234                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
     Westerling retired to a farm in the lush Parahyangan high-
lands south of Batavia. But this was not to be the end of the
Westerling saga. He still enjoyed widespread respect among the
officer corps and the rank and file of the colonial forces. More
importantly, he had an especially close relationship with the com-
mander of the colonial army, General Simon Hendrick Spoor.
      General Spoor had served with distinction in the colonial
military for two decades, interspersed with a period of teaching
at the Dutch military academy in the Netherlands. During the
Japanese occupation he had served as information officer with
the colonial government-in-exile in Australia. Spoor took com-
mand of KNIL when the Dutch returned in force in early 1946.
With his long experience in the East Indies and unrestricted ac-
cess to military intelligence reports, Spoor knew that many senior
Republican figures had shady or outright criminal backgrounds.
Spoor became a staunch opponent of granting any measure of
autonomy to the former colony, which brought him into conflict
with pro-independence factions.
      In De Eenling, Westerling wrote of a meeting on 7 February
1949, when Spoor asked for his opinion on the reaction of the
KNIL officer corps if Spoor were to seize power. Westerling re-
plied that all officers, with the exception of a few generals, would
back him up and Westerling himself promised his full support.
      Knowing Westerling's penchant for self-justification, I was
tempted to dismiss this account as either misrepresentation or
complete fantasy. Then I remembered a passage in a book I had
read the previous week: the memoirs of a leader of an anti-inde-
pendence faction of the Dutch parliament. The author states that
while on a working visit to the East Indies in June 1947 with an-
other influential politician opposed to the Indonesian revolution,
they had met General Spoor. During the meeting, Spoor asked if
they would support a military coup against the government in
                           SENSITIVE THINGS                          235
    the event Indonesia was granted full independence. Both politi-
    cians angrily rejected the suggestion. But these two independent
    reports of Spoor actively recruiting support for a coup, some eigh-
    teen months apart, suggested that the general had indeed been
    laying the groundwork for an attempt to seize power.
          Several references I came across in my readings from the
    period suggest that General Spoor was closely monitoring the de-
    veloping situation in postwar South Africa. The Afrikaaners, de-
    scendants of Dutch-speaking settlers who had migrated to South
    Africa in the 1700s, were a fiercely independent tribe with a pro-
    found emotional tie to what they considered to be their legitimate
    homeland. As did many Indos, the Afrikaners rejected any attempt
    by European politicians to grant autonomy to a native population
    that was, in their paternalistic view, ill-equipped to use it.
          The election of the minority National Party in August 1948
    would grant the Afrikaners total control of South Africa. They
    instituted a system of violent oppression of the native population
    unmatched in Indonesia even during the worst periods of the Cul-
    tivation System. The proposed federal solution for the East Indies
    would close the option of the Indos rising to power by democratic
    means. To keep the archipelago in the hands of European inhabit-
    ants, more radical measures would be required.
          Reading these accounts, I came to the belated realization
    that I had been looking for clues to the mystery of Bob Freeberg
    in the wrong places. These past years I had been combing offi-
    cial archives, hoping to find the one overlooked item that would
    provide the key to solving the mystery. What if no smoking gun
    administrative memo or diplomatic dispatch existed, because
    the Dutch and American governments had been just as mystified
    by the disappearance of RI-002?
          The overriding priority of a rogue operative is to erase the
    paper trail of his actions. If the disappearance of RI-002 had been
236                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
orchestrated in preparation for a coup attempt by Spoor and
Westerling, then it is almost certain that incriminating written or-
ders or records would have been destroyed.
     As, perhaps, they had been. After the Dutch formally ceded
sovereignty over the East Indies, the government and military
commenced the myriad daunting tasks necessary to lay the foun-
dations of a free nation. My own minor role was to work with a
team to administer the transfer of air bases and other assets from
the Militaire Luchtvaart to the Republic.
      One day, a colleague complained bitterly about his task,
which involved transferring operational reports from Karangen-
dah air base in Sumatra. This was the base where Bob landed his
CALI Dakota to prove that it could accommodate large aircraft.
We did not have a chance to use the airstrip for such aircraft: the
Dutch would take it over a few months afterward.
      My colleague was annoyed because an entire week of flight
logs from the base was missing. Considering the Dutch passion
for keeping meticulous records, he feared that our own person-
nel had somehow lost or misplaced them. Because my spoken
Dutch was superior to his, he asked me to request clarifica-
tion from his Dutch counterparts.
     When I did so the following week, I was met with only baf-
flement on their part. The Dutch team promised to check their
own document-transfer records. Days later, they informed me
that the flight logs had not been handed over to us, and could not
be found. The only explanation they could offer was clerical error.
     At the time, I did not connect this strange absence of records
with the mystery of RI-002. We were all overtaken by the victori-
ous and euphoric mood of realizing our long-cherished dream. We
simply assumed that RI-002, which had so narrowly escaped disas-
ter countless times, had finally been claimed by the forest. I would
later learn that many thousands of documents (enough to fill a
                          SENSITIVE THINGS                           237
    fourteen-meter shelf, according to one estimate) were absent from
    the shipment of administration records to the Netherlands. I now
    wondered if the missing items had been intentionally destroyed.
          Even if written documentation of Spoor's planned coup exists
    in some dark corner of Dutch government archives, it will probably
    never see the light of day. Given the dismal history of South Africa
    during the apartheid era, any suggestion that elements in the Dutch
    military had planned a similar solution for the Netherlands East
    Indies would create an uproar, and perhaps reignite anti-colonialist
    sentiment that should best be left buried in history.
          In 1994, when Alex Kawilarang made his extended visit to
    the Netherlands for medical treatment, he visited Otto Ward, a
    prominent military historian. Alex mentioned my research into
    the disappearance of RI-002. Ward was quite familiar with the
    case, and they discussed the many theories that had been bandied
    about over the years. Ward doubted that the mystery would ever
    be solved, because, as he explained to Alex enigmatically:
         “Certain sensitive things may never be revealed”.
238                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
     29
     SPITE THEIR
     FACE
     —
     JO G JAKARTA — MAD I U N
     July – September 1948
During the six weeks Bob would remain in Manila, other foreign
pilots, particularly Dave Fowler and Richard Cobley, took over his
blockade-running duties. As a contract pilot for POAS, Fowler pro-
vided a dependable link between Jogjakarta, Bukittinggi, and region-
al aviation centers. Nevertheless, Fowler was not an ideal solution
to our communications problems. Fowler refused missions which
would bring him close to Dutch positions, and strictly adhered to
Dakota specifications regarding cargo weight and passenger capacity.
      Suryadarma was constantly annoyed with what he consid-
ered to be Fowler’s excess of caution. Suryadarma regarded our
struggle as open warfare where peacetime practices of aviation
safety need not apply. If Suryadarma was exasperated with Fowl-
er’s company-man attitude, he was infuriated with the cavalier
conduct of the freelance pilots, who resisted his efforts to forge
a rigid military hierarchy with an inviolable chain of command.
Even in the case of aircraft carrying our still-fictitious RI regis-
tration, the pilots remained independent suppliers, treating each
mission as a stand-alone contract. With our motley fleet of Japa-
nese hand-me-downs inoperative, we had become entirely depen-
dent on these foreign freebooters.
                          SPITE THEIR FACE                           239
          Of all the foreigners, RI-005 pilot Richard Cobley caused Sury-
    adarma the most grief. A skilled aviator able to land his amphibious
    Catalina on little more than a fish pond, Cobley was not reluctant to
    accept the most hazardous assignments—for a price. Cobley openly
    boasted of the large profits he was making—money literally taken
    from the mouths of our undernourished citizens and soldiers—while
    his insensitivity to Asian culture and manners caused no end of need-
    less offense. The brash Australian boasted of having a separate ar-
    rangement with the Minister of Finance. Accordingly, he said, he had
    no need to base himself at Maguwo, instead landing his Catalina on
    Lake Campurdarat in East Java, far from the oversight of military
    officials and bureaucrats in Jogjakarta.
          Suryadarma’s dissatisfaction with Cobley turned to outright
    alarm when we learned that during one mission he had attempted
    to renegotiate his fee in mid-flight. The Republican military of-
    ficer in charge of the cargo was compelled to pull his sidearm,
    thus ending the discussion. It was obvious that neither Cobley's
    foolhardy recklessness nor Fowler's excessive caution were serv-
    ing our revolution well. Each passing week without Bob only re-
    minded us of the value of his unique contribution to our struggle.
          Cobley also may have been one of the pilots who brought in
    cargoes we could have done without: communist leaders. During the
    crackdown on political activism in the 1930s, during which Soek-
    arno and other nationalist leaders were arrested and exiled, most
    top members of Indonesian communist organizations opted to flee
    overseas. Now they were returning. Cobley was widely suspected
    of transporting at least one communist leader, primarily because his
    amphibious base at Lake Campurdarat in remote southeastern Java
    near Madiun, was ideal for these clandestine arrivals.
          Madiun had been a hotbed of communist activity for two
    decades. The returning cadres were pleased to discover that the
    town remained a fertile ground for their propaganda. They re-
240                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
viled the nationalists, claiming that Soekarno and Hatta had col-
laborated with the Japanese. Working through leftist parties in
Jogjakarta, the communists set about building popular support
for open rebellion against the Republic of Indonesia.
       On 15 August 1948 (to our great relief) RI-002 finally re-
turned to Jogjakarta. An hour after Bob’s arrival, I happened to
walk past RI-002 as I crossed the parking apron en route to my of-
fice. When I spotted the aircraft where I had spent so much of the
previous year, I was both wistful and apprehensive. I had not seen
nor communicated with Bob since my transfer and promotion in
May. However, Bob spotted me from the cockpit and leaned out
the window to give me a cheerful greeting. I approached the Da-
kota and stood below the cockpit window. I was not sure whether
or not to apologize to Bob about our disagreement, so instead I
asked him about a subject dear to every pilot's heart: the condi-
tion of his aircraft. Bob grinned and pointed to the port-side wing.
He told me that he had replaced the wing cracked in the accident
in Bukittinggi with a new wing taken from a wartime C-47 that
had been decommissioned and dismantled for parts. The paint
job had been hurried and slipshod: I could still discern the faint
outlines of the original US Air Force insignia on the lower sur-
face of the wing. Bob then told me he had brought a bottle of
good whiskey from Manila, and invited me to stop by the Hotel
Merdeka on my way home that evening.
       I arrived at the hotel well after dark to find Bob sitting at the
dining table on the terrace of his ground-floor suite. He invited me to
sit, then went into his room, emerging moments later with the bottle
of whiskey and two glasses. We clicked glasses and I savored my first
sip of whiskey since being re-assigned to a desk in Jogjakarta.
       Bob’s first words were his apology for the smuggled-gems
incident. He explained that Boedi had taken it upon himself to
restore our friendship by explaining my reasons for concealing
                            SPITE THEIR FACE                             241
    the fact that I was smuggling the gems. He explained about my
    reservations with his roommates, and my worries that someone
    might reveal that I was smuggling weapons into the Republic,
    even if only officers' sidearms.
          Boedi had already informed Bob of my upcoming marriage,
    and he now had good news of his own. June had accepted his pro-
    posal. She was now back in the United States, and Bob intended
    to visit her (and his family in Kansas) that Christmas.
          Bob poured us another shot, and then spoke to me of
    his personal feelings, hopes, and fears; something he had
    never done before. In marrying June, the unanswered ques-
    tion was : where would they live?
          June might well insist that she and Bob build their married
    life somewhere in America. However, Bob now told me, he had
    few remaining contacts back home. During three years of war-
    time training and service, followed by another two years in Asia,
    Bob had lost track of friends, classmates, and colleagues who
    might help him establish himself in the domestic aviation industry
    before his meager savings ran out.
          Even if June did agree to live in Asia, Bob’s future would be
    uncertain. He was reluctant to return to contract piloting. He had
    quit CALI in 1947 because he was flying more hours for less money.
    Even then, his salary might be paid weeks late. Unlike Bob, many
    of the Aviation Brotherhood were happy to live a hand-to-mouth
    existence, spending their relatively meager paycheck in the bars of
    Manila, Singapore, or Bangkok before climbing back into the cock-
    pit. But as a married man, Bob would be looking to build a future.
          So far, none of Bob’s various business ventures had come to
    fruition. Bob’s contract with the Republic was his one remaining
    hope of achieving financial independence. However, since we had
    paid him only a fraction of our promised fees, he lacked sufficient
    operating capital for expansion of his business, or even to keep
242                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
RI-002 in top mechanical condition. Bob could only keep flying his
grueling mission schedule hoping that his beloved Dakota, and his
luck, would last until we had won our struggle for independence.
      Bob resumed his routine of back-to-back missions, shuttling
between Jogjakarta and Bukittinggi, with the occasional side trip
to Singapore. However, Suryadarma had not forgiven Bob for
what he considered to have been blatant insubordination at the
end of the Soekarno Tour. During the first few days of September
1948, Suryadarma and Bob had another disagreement over some
minor matter, as a result of which Suryadarma canceled Bob’s al-
lowance of aviation fuel, effectively grounding RI-002.
      Dave Fowler had also crossed swords with Suryadarma over
aviation fuel. However, Suryadarma had no real authority over
Fowler, who was a POAS employee. POAS had been contracted by
the civilian government, so Fowler’s employer had resolved the mat-
ter with a trip up to Kaliurang and a genial chat with Vice President
Hatta, who had authorized the commercial agreement. Though
Soekarno made no secret of his high respect and considerable af-
fection for the courteous and modest American who so visibly sup-
ported our struggle, protocol prevented Bob from going over Sury-
adarma's head with a similar visit to the presidential palace.
      A few weeks later, I again met Bob for a few drinks on his
terrace at the Hotel Merdeka. On this occasion, Dave Fowler
joined us. He had flown in from Bangkok the previous evening,
and had a disturbing tale to tell.
      As a promotional gimmick, POAS had offered free flights
into Jogjakarta for journalists “willing to take the risk”. Sev-
eral foreign correspondents did take up the offer. As the air-
craft approached Java, Fowler felt uneasy. The aircraft was
equipped with a radio capable of receiving military band com-
munication, so Fowler asked his radio operator to monitor the
Militaire Luchtvaart frequencies.
                           SPITE THEIR FACE                           243
           Minutes later, the operator picked up a strong signal, perhaps
     from an aircraft only kilometers away. Fowler killed all lights on
     the aircraft and peered into the sky from his cockpit side window,
     though he knew he had little chance of spotting an aircraft the
     size of a fighter in the night sky.
           The Dutch-language radio chatter continued, ceased for
     several minutes, continued, then ceased again. Looking out the
     window again, Fowler believed he spotted the silhouette of an
     aircraft banking ninety degrees, the full wingspan easily discern-
     ible against moonlit clouds. This would be standard practice for a
     military fighter breaking off contact with a potential target. Fowl-
     er continued on his course, turning on his running lights only as
     he made his final approach into Jogjakarta.
          We all toasted Dave’s good fortune. Talk soon turned to the
     petty annoyances of the blockade runs, issues that concerned the
     pilots far more than the real possibility of being shot out of the sky.
           Because of my fluency in English (and Dutch) and general
     familiarity with western manners, after a few drinks foreigners of-
     ten will forget that they are in the company of an Indonesian. This
     was obviously the case when Bob and Dave complained bitterly
     about their dealings with Suryadarma, with Bob finally stating:
    “These people would cut off their nose to spite their face.”
           Bob immediately realized his indiscretion, and shot me a
     sheepish grin. I smiled and raised my hands, open palms outward,
     to signal that I had not taken offense. Nonetheless, I was dis-
     turbed. While Bob enjoyed a near-hero status from common In-
     donesians, only Soekarno had conveyed official gratitude for his
     contribution. During our years of struggle it was our custom to
     never express open appreciation to a fellow freedom fighter for
     assistance or a sacrifice, no matter how arduous or dangerous. It
     was our way of reminding ourselves that we acted from duty to
     the cause of freedom, not by personal choice.
244                            ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Though I knew Bob was not concerned about recognition—
in fact he would have been hugely embarrassed if presented with
a medal or other symbolic gift of national gratitude—I was also
aware that he did not take disrespect lightly. Suryadarma’s petty
insistence on treating Bob as an unruly subordinate, not as an in-
dependent supplier and professional peer, must have rankled the
proud, self-reliant American farm boy.
      In retrospect, I could see how the endless overwork and in-
sufficient compensation Bob endured during his year of flying for
Indonesia might have exhausted his legendary patience. Though
nothing in Bob’s character or background suggest that he might
be capable of grand theft, a quarter-ton of gold is a lot of money
to a lone foreigner, a stranger in a strange land facing physical
peril as well as constant legal and financial difficulties. In my
heart, I could understand the temptation to regard the gold as
rightful due for his extraordinary services to the Republic. I could
not deny the possibility, however remote, that our hired gun had,
in fact, flown off into the sunset with the treasure.
                          SPITE THEIR FACE                           245
          30
          BETRAYAL
          IN BANTEN
          —
          JAKARTA
          August – September 1998
    By August 1998, memories of the cataclysmic events of the previous
    May had receded from our memories, and life in Jakarta returned
    to some semblance of normality. We once again ventured from the
    relative safety of our homes for purposes other than essential errands.
          One evening, I attended a social function during which a
    troupe of debus mystics from Banten, a region of western Java, en-
    tertained guests with feats of invulnerability and other purported
    magical abilities. My own interest in the Javanese spiritual prac-
    tices has led to a life-long fascination with debus practitioners. I
    first witnessed a demonstration of their uncanny powers when I
    was part of the team who sought out and liaised with freedom
    fighters in the west Java highlands in early 1949, during the final
    weeks of our struggle for independence. I watched, astonished,
    while a Bantenese guerrilla forcefully stabbed his leader's bare
    torso with a keris, the traditional wavy bladed dagger that can
    inflict fearsome injuries. But the blade did not penetrate the skin,
    though the pressure had made a visible mark. I gingerly touched
    the keris blade: it was indeed razor sharp.
          While modern debus performances are no more than enter-
    tainment, a generation ago these displays of spiritual power were
246                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
used to underpin the authority of local tribal leaders, called juwarah.
These juwarah commanded large and loyal followings, and many
led quasi-criminal gangs, generating revenue through extortion and
thuggery. The power wielded by the juwarah, combined with the
fiercely independent spirit of the Bantenese, caused no end of socio-
political headaches for Batavia and, later, for Jogjakarta. The inde-
pendence of the Bantenese ensured that they would be among the
first to join the Republic of Indonesia, but when Dutch columns
swept out of Batavia to occupy strategic points along the north coast
and the Parahyangan highlands in July 1947, they wisely avoided
the Banten area, though it lay right on Batavia’s western flank.
      I suspect that in their more pessimistic moments our lead-
ers would have preferred that the Dutch had taken over Banten.
The Bantenese demanded that the officials appointed by Jogja-
karta be recalled and replaced by juwarah, greatly complicating
administration. While there were no overt demonstrations of
disloyalty from the juwarah, this did not exclude the possibil-
ity of covert communication with the Dutch, which would have
presented few difficulties given the free movement of goods and
people over the demarcation line, only 40 kilometers from Serang,
which separated Banten and Batavia.
      I discovered just how free this flow of information might
have been when Maria brought me yet another useful item of
research. This book, Life With Eri-San, was the biography of
General Dr. Erie Soedewo, the Republican Army territorial com-
mander of Banten from 1948 until the transfer of sovereignty in
December 1949. The author was his widow, Mang Eri Sudewo.
The owner of the second-hand bookshop where Maria found the
volume explained that he was acquainted with Mang Eri, and so
had agreed to stock and promote her book. Maria told him of her
interest in the story, and was given Mang Eri’s contact informa-
tion, which she passed on to me.
                        B E T R AYA L I N B A N T E N                   247
           During the course of a lengthy telephone conversation with
    Mang Eri, I learned much of interest. I asked her specifically to
    recount all she could remember of the night the crates of gold
    were loaded onto RI-002. Mang Eri told me that she had clear
    memories of the incident. She noted that there had been no spe-
    cial precautions taken by the government in Banten to keep the
    existence and the destination of the crates of gold a secret. She
    had seen the crates of gold herself, and believed their existence
    to have been common knowledge.
           In fact, she believed it entirely possible that the Dutch knew
    about the gold as well. Mang Eri had spent considerable time in
    the Dutch military archives in the Netherlands while research-
    ing her book. The Dutch historians were enthusiastic in their as-
    sistance, leading her to items that she could not have found on
    her own. Thus, she discovered memos and other communications
    detailing her late husband’s secret activities as the military com-
    mander of the Republican region. The documents listed many of
    the confidential staff meetings he liked to call with no notice, and
    his unannounced inspection visits to outlying positions. Given
    this evidence of full knowledge of numerous clandestine activi-
    ties, I believe it is safe to assume that the Dutch were aware of the
    quantity of gold stored in Serang.
           Mang Eri also shared her thoughts on the general security
    situation at the time. She felt that the loyalty of some officers un-
    der her husband's command was doubtful, as subsequently many
    were purged for communist sympathies after independence.
          This was not surprising. Menes, a small town in Banten, was
    the site of the first communist uprising in the East Indies in 1926.
    The colonial government brutally suppressed the rebellion, and
    the region subsequently remained quiet. However, many believed
    that the Bantenese continued to provide covert support to com-
    munist organizers elsewhere in Java.
248                             ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      That might have included some of my own colleagues in the
Air Force. I knew at the time that certain key positions in Air
Force headquarters were in the hands of officers who were either
covert communist party members or active sympathizers. It is
quite possible, I believe, that the Dutch were informed of both the
presence of the gold in Serang, along with the flight schedule of
RI-002, by officers of questionable loyalty looking to undermine
the Republic and further an alternate agenda.
      While Spoor might have been perfectly content to avail him-
self of intelligence supplied by communist sympathizers in Re-
publican ranks, he was under no illusion that the communists
could rule an independent Indonesia any better than the Repub-
licans. Spoor would point to the perfidy of the communists, the
lawlessness of the Banten juwarah and other regional strongmen,
and the open rebellion of the Hizbullah Mujahideen as proof that
the East Indies was ungovernable by any system other than the
strict, paternal hand of the Dutch.
      Westerling justified his atrocities by insisting that he was only
trying to save the Indonesian people from the “Japanese collabora-
tors” and “murderous terrorists” of the Republicans. Both Spoor and
Westerling, as well as many other conservative military and civilian
officials, were convinced that a fully autonomous Indonesia would
be rent by internal conflict and face a constant threat of disintegra-
tion, to the peril of European, Chinese, and Eurasian residents.
      Westerling claimed that by February 1949, Spoor had been
well along in his plans for a coup. If so, he would have needed an
untraceable source of financing for arms purchases, intelligence
work, and support for civilian militias or other groups who might
back up his own forces. In South Africa, the Afrikaaners had fi-
nanced their rise to power partly through ready access to large
amounts of a valuable, easily concealed, and marketable com-
modity: diamonds. But the bulky resources such as rubber, coffee,
                         B E T R AYA L I N B A N T E N                  249
    and sugar that constituted most of the wealth of the Netherlands
    East Indies provided no such convenient currency. To fund his
    coup, Spoor would need a more compact treasure: gold.
          The horde of gold in storage at Serang would have been
    ideal for his purpose. Spoor knew that the Republicans were
    systematically moving national assets to Bukittinggi using RI-
    002. If the Dakota were intercepted, forced to land, the cargo
    off-loaded, and then released (only to be shot down shortly there-
    after) a highly placed conspirator with access to the flight logs
    for the region need only remove the relevant entries for RI-002
    to vanish—along with the gold.
          The gold carried on RI-002 could have provided a signifi-
    cant portion of the funds Spoor would have needed to mount
    a coup. At market prices prevailing in 1949, two hundred and
    fifty kilograms of gold bullion would be worth almost three hun-
    dred thousand American dollars. To get an idea of how much
    that would buy on the black market, I spoke to a friend who had
    assisted the Republic in the clandestine procurement of arms in
    Singapore. He replied that for a similar amount, the Republican
    military had purchased eighteen hundred rifles, three Oerlikon
    20mm anti-aircraft guns, and a complete field hospital.
          Westerling claims that Spoor had asked him about the possi-
    bility of purchasing arms on the black market in Singapore some-
    time in February 1949. Assuming that Spoor had had access to
    war booty confiscated in the so-called police actions of July 1947
    and December 1948 as well as the RI-002 gold, Westerling could
    have outfitted, literally, a small army.
          The unconfirmed reports of Bob and the crew in captivity are
    tantalizing indications that Spoor had ordered the interception of
    RI-002—with or without the knowledge of the colonial govern-
    ment. The failure to find Bob's dog tags in the RI-002 wreckage and
250                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
later reports of Bob being detained in Tanjung Pinang suggest that
someone else (presumably co-pilot Bambang Saptoadji) had been at
the controls when the Dakota slammed into Mount Punggur.
      This scenario is plausible considering that Spoor would not
have allowed Bob to pilot RI-002 himself. The Dutch fighters
would have to shoot down RI-002 over a location that was difficult
to access to be confident that wreckage would not be discovered
for years—or even decades, as was indeed the case. All knew of
Bob's extraordinary piloting skills; there was a real possibility that
before the Dakota reached a suitable area a sudden storm or other
opportunity would allow Bob to elude the interceptors and reach
Republican territory. Thus, they would have decided to keep Bob
in detention after releasing the Indonesian crew. One more western
gun-runner would not attract attention in a Dutch military prison.
      Despite the plausibility of this scenario, I had no real evi-
dence that the General and Westerling had done any more than
discuss the possibility of a coup. Even if they had taken steps to
implement their plans, they would not come to fruition, for here
the story of General Spoor takes a strange turn. In his capacity as
confidant and “eyes-on-the-ground”, Westerling met with Spoor
late in February 1949 to discuss another matter: the mysterious
death of a colonial army junior officer, Second Lieutenant R.C.I.
Aernout. Spoor believed that the death was linked to reported
arms sales to the Republic by corrupt colonial army officers. He
asked Westerling to investigate.
      Two months later, Spoor himself was dead, suffering a pre-
sumed heart attack after a working lunch during which he and
his dining companions, two fellow officers, had been stricken
with food poisoning. Dutch historian Jaap de Moor, Spoor’s bi-
ographer, believes that Spoor had been weakened by the exces-
sive demands of his duties and a penchant for micro-management.
I know from my meetings with Dutch counterparts during the
                         B E T R AYA L I N B A N T E N                 251
    handover of colonial aviation assets to the Republic that many
    believed Spoor to have been poisoned; assassinated by the cor-
    rupt officers he was investigating. But the deed might well have
    been done by officers loyal to their government, who saw this as
    the only way to stop an impending military coup. The dictatorial
    Spoor was widely detested, and Westerling himself admitted that
    a few generals would not have supported Spoor’s plans.
         Whatever the cause, Spoor's unexpected passing would have
    sealed Bob Freeberg's fate as well. If the coup had been successful,
    as de facto head of state Spoor would have been unassailable, and
    might even have contrived to use his granting of “amnesty” to
    the “notorious Bob Freeberg” to his political advantage. But with
    coup plans in disarray, the co-conspirators would have greatly
    feared the possibility of Bob Freeberg reappearing and telling his
    story. In all probability he met his untimely end sometime be-
    tween May 1949 and the transfer of Glodok prison into Republi-
    can hands some months later. In either case, his remains are gone
    forever, and no headstone will ever remind the world of the young
    American who gave his life for our freedom.
252                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
     31
     LAST FLIGHT
     OF RI-002
     —
     J O G JA K A RTA — BA N T E N — M A D I U N
     September – October 1948
Bob was grounded for two weeks. During our regular breakfast
on the Hotel Tugu terrace waiting for the train to Maguwo, Bam-
bang would vent his frustration at being grounded along with
Bob. Bambang’s English-language skills had improved sufficiently
that Boedi was no longer required to help Bob communicate dur-
ing internal flights. Boedi had been reassigned, leaving Bambang
the sole remaining member of the original RI-002 crew.
     By the second week of September 1948, the backlog of mis-
sions compelled Suryadarma to restore Bob’s fuel allowance. RI-
002 made a number of routine flights to Republican territories,
then on 17 September flew to Manila.
     RI-002 returned to Jogjakarta two days afterward. Bob
sent word that the cargo carried by RI-002 from Manila includ-
ed several bottles of good whiskey, and invited me to drop by
the Hotel Merdeka that evening.
     At the hotel, I was surprised to meet Tom Lee and Cliff Bald-
win. Tom offered no clear explanation of why he and Cliff had
hopped on RI-002 for the flight to Jogjakarta. The only topic of
discussion was the event that had transpired in the eastern Java
town of Madiun the previous day. On 18 September the weeks of
                         LAST FLIGHT OF RI–002                     253
    clandestine work by the returned communist cadres came to frui-
    tion. They declared Madiun to be an independent “soviet repub-
    lic” as militants swept the town, detaining and often summarily
    executing Republican civilian officials and military officers who
    refused to profess loyalty to the communists.
          I had once told Tom of my childhood in Madiun, where my
    father had been a native official, so he asked my opinion of the
    situation. I remembered the passionate conviction of the young
    communist cadres, many of whom had been exiled to the dreaded
    Boven Digoel concentration camp in Dutch New Guinea. They
    seemed to have lost none of their firebrand passion, calling, bi-
    zarrely, for a revolution against a government that was itself in
    revolt against the Dutch. But I could not say whether their views
    of class struggle truly resonated among common people.
          The next morning, a familiar face appeared in my office
    at Maguwo. It was Flight Lieutenant Santoso, the former com-
    mander of Karangendah air base where Bob had made a test
    landing at my request on the third CALI blockade run. The
    Dutch had overrun Karangendah six months afterward, during
    their first military aggression against the Republic. Santoso had
    made a strategic retreat to Jogjakarta, and was reassigned to
    command the air base at Madiun.
          Now he was back in Jogjakarta, having narrowly escaped
    the mobs hunting down and murdering Republican officials. Sury-
    adarma had assigned Santoso to RI-002 as reserve copilot, and so
    he had sought me out to ask about the aircraft and its now-legend-
    ary captain. I explained the mechanical quirks of the old Dakota,
    and how to deal with Bob’s forthright attitude. I also suggested
    (only partially in jest) that Santoso bring along ample reading ma-
    terial on his flights. I knew that Bambang was trying to build up
    his Dakota flight hours to qualify as captain and would be unlikely
    to relinquish the copilot seat for even the shortest period.
254                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      With Madiun under communist control, Republican leader-
ship prepared for the worst, aware that the uprising would only
support the Dutch contention that the Republic was unable to
maintain peace and security in Java. They feared that a second mili-
tary campaign to take over remaining Republican-held territories
was just a matter of time, and that the government must urgently
take immediate steps to ensure the Republic's survival.
      Near the top of the priority list was the quarter-metric-ton
of gold in temporary storage at Republican headquarters in Se-
rang, the capital of Banten. Suryadarma ordered Dave Fowler to
move this stockpile to Bukittinggi in preparation for safe stor-
age in a sympathetic nation, probably India. Though this mission
was well within the bounds of the agreement between POAS, the
airline he flew for, and the Republic, Fowler refused. No amount
of threats or entreaties from Suryadarma could change his mind.
      Fowler had just received some disturbing news from his supe-
rior in POAS, who had also been on the dramatic flight transporting
journalists to Jogjakarta. According to POAS sources, the fighters on
his tail had requested instructions from their base, and the matter
had been passed to General Spoor himself for a decision on whether
to intercept the flight. Fortunately, the general had been informed
that civilians were on board, and ordered the fighters to disengage.
      Fowler was concerned that the Dutch had been so easily able
to access his passenger manifest. He assumed that the gold he
was now being asked to transport had been confiscated from a
Dutch-owned mine sometime during the chaotic weeks after the
Japanese surrender. If he were to encounter a Dutch patrol on this
flight, the fighter pilots might be advised that Fowler's Dakota
carried not innocent civilians, but stolen goods, and would act ac-
cordingly. Suryadarma had no choice but to call in Bob Freeberg.
      The mission would be delayed for ten days by unfavorable
weather in Banten. In the meantime, Bob undertook several short
                       LAST FLIGHT OF RI–002                          255
    flights to regional destinations. In my view, the most important of
    these missions was also the shortest: a brief hop to fly over Ma-
    diun and drop propaganda leaflets urging residents and freedom
    fighters to rally behind the Republican government.
          As I had warned Santoso, Bambang did not let him any-
    where near the copilot seat, though this easy flight over home
    territory would have been a good chance for Bob to evaluate his
    new crew member’s skills. Instead, Santoso took a position by
    the rear door, which would remain open for the flight. As RI-002
    swooped over the town and surrounding villages, Santoso bal-
    anced on his precarious perch and opened packages of leaflets,
    which fluttered out the open door.
          On the return leg, Bob decided to have some fun. He told
    Santoso (now safely strapped to a seat in the crew cabin) and
    Bambang to pay full attention. Pointing to an imaginary Dutch
    fighter on the horizon, he dove earthward. As though flying a
    nimble Curen biplane, Bob pushed the lumbering Dakota through
    breathtaking tree-top maneuvers between the twin volcanic peaks
    of Merapi and Merbabu, thus proving, yet again, the appropriate-
    ness of our affectionate nickname: “Bob The Best”.
          During the rest of September, the situation in Madiun grew
    more worrisome. Reports emerged of brutal killings, including
    public beheadings, of community and religious leaders who were
    not necessarily members of the Republican administration.
          On the final day of September 1948, the Republic dropped
    the hammer. A Siliwangi Division brigade was dispatched from
    Jogjakarta to retake the city, with the support of other troops
    marching from the east. The rebellion was quickly suppressed,
    and all but a handful of the rebel leaders captured.
          As the army was mopping up in Madiun, RI-002 took off
    from Maguwo for Gorda airstrip in Banten. On board were Bob,
    Bambang Saptoadji, Santoso, Soemadi, a junior officer, Surjatman,
256                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
a sergeant, and Samaun Bakri, a senior Republican official re-
sponsible for the gold cargo. Turbulence over the Parahyangan
highlands forced Bob to detour north, at one point flying almost
in visual range of Batavia. But the Dakota soon re-entered Repub-
lican territory west of Tangerang and landed minutes later at Gor-
da, less than an hour before sunset. During that night, ten large
wooden cases, each containing twenty-five kilograms of gold bul-
lion from the mine at Cikotok, were loaded onto the aircraft.
      The following morning, RI-002 departed Gorda. No suit-
able aviation fuel was available in Banten, so, as planned, RI-002
hopped eighty kilometers across the Sunda Strait to Branti airfield
in Sumatra to refuel. At two o'clock on the afternoon of 1 Octo-
ber 1948, with full tanks and under clear skies, RI-002 departed
Branti airstrip for Bengkulu, the final stop before Bukittinggi. RI-
002 flew toward the west and the remote forests of Mount Pung-
gur, where it would crash and lay, unseen, for three decades.
      The disappearance of RI-002 cast a pall over what should
have been the most joyous days of my life: the weeks of prepara-
tion for my wedding. My worries about Bob, Bambang, Santoso,
and the others distracted me from the social and spiritual rituals
I needed to undertake to mark this milestone in my life. I could
only hope that Bob and his crew would suddenly walk out of
the forest somewhere in south Sumatra: a possibility that became
less likely with each passing day.
      The Air Force had dispatched field teams to settlements
along the presumed flight path, but could not divert the re-
sources required for an intensive ground search of the rugged
highlands between Branti and Bengkulu. Authorities in Batavia
adamantly denied knowledge of the fate of RI-002. The colo-
nial press revelled in vilifying Bob as an amoral soldier of for-
tune, who, in the words of one journalist, “made merry” with
                       LAST FLIGHT OF RI–002                         257
    the Republic's gold. This was to be expected, considering how
    Bob had thumbed his nose at Batavia by running their blockade
    with impunity for over a year.
          I was distressed to learn that American officials also held
    their compatriot in low regard. Tom Lee, now stranded in Jogja-
    karta by the disappearance of his intended ride home, frequently
    contacted the American consulate in Batavia for assistance in ar-
    ranging transportation back to Manila for Cliff and himself. As a
    senior government employee, he spoke informally with consular
    officials, and learned that the Americans were making no effort
    to investigate Bob's disappearance beyond the cursory visit to
    Palembang airfield. In fact, Tom told me, many of the American
    diplomats stationed in Batavia seemed to regard Bob as a thorn
    in their side, a constant annoyance upsetting their dealings with
    the Dutch. Tom confided, sadly, that the American officials might
    well be relieved that their problematic compatriot had vanished.
          As my wedding date neared, I was compelled to set aside my
    concern over my friend's fate to concentrate on fulfilling my du-
    ties as a bridegroom. Javanese weddings can be daunting affairs,
    with many complex rituals that must be performed correctly be-
    fore, during, and after the ceremony itself.
          On my wedding day, my heart was gladdened when I saw Tom
    Lee at the reception. He wore only a casual shirt and slacks. When
    I greeted him he immediately apologized for his manner of dress.
    He explained that since he and Cliff had decided to accompany
    RI-002 on the flight to Jogjakarta on the spur of the moment, and
    stay only a short time, he had brought only one change of clothes.
          Nevertheless, Tom was the best-dressed among us. The other
    guests wore only threadbare traditional costume, or ragged work
    clothing carefully scrubbed clean for the occasion. In normal
    times, their mode of dress would have been an intolerable breach
    of etiquette. An essential tenet of our traditional culture is kera-
258                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
pihan, or “tidiness”. We believe that proper dress and grooming
demonstrates respect for our fellows, and is a reflection of our
self-control and good breeding.
       But no one was embarrassed by the shabby condition of
their attire. We wore our rags with pride as a visible reminder
of our dedication to the important cause we were fighting for.
Even though our rallying cry was merdeka atau mati, freedom
or death, we did, in fact, have other options. Our leaders did not
fear that they would be summarily shot if they surrendered; the
people did not expect to be herded into concentration camps.
At any point, we could have just said enough is enough, ac-
cepted the Dutch proposal of a limited autonomy with a vague
promise of full independence at an unspecified future date,
and returned to our normal lives.
       But we never did. We stoically endured the deprivations of
the blockade until our eventual triumph was assured. Our shabby
dress, normally a cause of deep shame, had become a symbol of
great personal honor, for the greater humiliation would have been
capitulation to our despised former colonial masters.
      Our wedding ceremony proceeded to the satisfaction of all
parties—an auspicious beginning to a half-century of loving and
fulfilling partnership. But Ani and I would have to endure many
trials before settling into domestic life, as we would discover
scarcely two months into our marriage.
                       LAST FLIGHT OF RI–002                       259
          32
          TWO
          PALEMBANGS
          —
          JAKARTA
          October 1998
    One evening in early October 1998, Alex Kawilarang and I
    sipped Dutch gin in our favorite retro-colonial restaurant as we
    watched television coverage of the student protests that had once
    again paralyzed daily life in the capital. These demonstrations,
    so far peaceful and orderly, were protesting a proposed nation-
    al security law that would, among other measures, effectively
    outlaw the type of street demonstrations we were now watch-
    ing. Alex and I shared a rueful laugh as we watched a govern-
    ment official blame the perennial scapegoat, communists, for the
    resurgence of student protests.
         “If he is looking for communists he should start in the grave-
    yard,” Alex said, “because that is the only place he will find them.”
          Our dinner companion, Herman, shot Alex a quizzical
    glance. Herman was a good friend of Paul Verspoor. He was visit-
    ing Indonesia partly to indulge his interest in Dutch aviation his-
    tory, so Alex had invited me to join them for dinner.
          I explained to Herman that the accusation was intended to
    divert attention from the real concerns voiced by protesters. This
    was a time-honored tactic of Soeharto's now-defunct New Or-
    der government. Soeharto had engineered the ouster of President
260                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
Soekarno over a two-year period in the mid 1960s by blaming an
attempted coup on the Indonesian Communist Party. Soeharto
executed the purported leaders of the coup and called for a na-
tionwide purge of those suspected of communist affiliation. Since,
by that time, the Indonesian Communist Party was the largest in
the world, with well over two million members, Soeharto set in
motion a slaughter that ranks among the most horrific episodes
of genocide in human history. When the guns were finally silenced
and the knives and clubs wiped clean, perhaps a million Indone-
sians lay in secret mass graves.
      During the following decades, whenever popular opposition
to government policies became too outspoken, one or two po-
litical prisoners who had escaped immediate execution would see
their decades-long detention end abruptly with a brief burst of
national publicity followed by a date with the firing squad. But
the pathetic spectacle of blaming a few broken old men for the
nation's ills obscured the reality that, during our time of struggle,
communism had indeed posed a real threat to our future as an
independent, self-reliant nation.
      Though the mass killings were, of course, indefensible, I firmly
believe that the final elimination of communism as a political force
in Indonesia was the most desirable outcome. Like the Hizbullah
Mujahideen and their dream of a caliphate comprising all Muslim
regions of Southeast Asia, communism is transnational, and purely
national interests must take second place. As one of my fellow of-
ficers memorably stated during the Madiun rebellion:
     “If Indonesia goes communist we will have yet another gang
of foreigners in a distant land telling us how to live our lives.”
      This was hardly an appropriate topic for a pleasant dinner
with a foreign visitor, so Alex changed the subject by asking Her-
man about the discovery he had made while visiting airfields in
Sumatra. Herman told us that he had stumbled upon the site of
                           T WO PA L E M B A N G S                     261
    a long-decommissioned airstrip near the town of Palembang. A
    quick glance at the map he had drawn confirmed that he had
    found Karangendah, the airstrip were Bob and I had made our
    test landing during the third CALI blockade run.
          Karangendah had been under Republican control from the
    end of the war until August 1947, when the Dutch swept through
    the lowlands of Sumatra securing oil fields and ports. Local resi-
    dents told Herman that during the period of Dutch control, which
    lasted until the transfer of sovereignty in December 1949, the of-
    ficial designation of the facility had been changed to Palembang II
    in order to differentiate it from the larger airstrip on the outskirts
    of that town, 60 kilometers to the northeast.
          This intriguing item of information explained a nagging dis-
    crepancy in my theory about the fate of RI-002. News agencies
    reported that RI-002 had been intercepted and forced to land
    in Palembang. At Senator Clyde Reed's insistence, the American
    consulate in Batavia had sent a junior officer to Palembang to
    investigate. The officer reported that he had found no evidence of
    a recent landing by a large aircraft.
          It stands to reason that the official had not been aware of the
    second Palembang airfield. Herman said that there were indica-
    tions the Dutch had used the strip only as a base for small military
    aircraft, and that its existence was, more or less, a secret.
          Given the lack of enthusiasm expressed by the American
    diplomats in Batavia for investigating the fate of Bob Freeberg, I
    doubt that anyone in the consulate would have bothered to ask
    the Dutch if there were any other airfields in the Palembang vicin-
    ity. Even if he had, the Dutch may not have admitted the existence
    their military airfield at Karangendah.
          Though this new evidence was compelling, I still had no de-
    finitive proof of my theory. The revelation about Palembang II
    was just one more in a seemingly endless procession of tantalizing
262                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
clues that ultimately led nowhere. However, as I bade farewell to
Herman and thanked him for sharing his discovery, I could not
guess that I had just embarked on the final stage of my decade-
long quest for the truth about Bob Freeberg and RI-002.
      A few days after my dinner with Alex and Herman, Maria
paid us a visit, her first in some weeks. Maria told us that since the
library is situated in the vicinity of two university campuses and
near the junction of two major urban arteries, the round of student
demonstrations, now daily occurrences involving many thousands
of protesters, often resulted in complete traffic gridlock in all adja-
cent streets. On these occasions, Maria chose to stay in the library
until the evening, long after the demonstrations had dispersed.
      But those long hours passed quickly, for Maria was engaged
in a massive task. Her internship with the foreign scholar was
now completed, and the library had asked her to use her new
skills to assist in cataloging the newspaper archives on the sev-
enth floor. These archives were the most complete collection of
historical newspapers in the nation: over a thousand titles, many
dating back to the mid-Nineteenth Century. Only a fraction of
this collection had been microfilmed. In addition, much of the
material had been misfiled before being consolidated into this na-
tional repository. Maria's task was to ensure that the catalogs
accurately reflected the material on the shelves.
      Maria often worked alone. The seventh floor was closed to the
public, and even accredited researchers could only request specific
volumes to be extracted by the staff and brought out for reading.
With the now-routine disruptions of private and public transport
caused by the daily demonstrations, Maria's colleagues would often
arrive late, leave early or both. Most researchers had simply decided
to postpone their visits until life in Jakarta returned to normal.
      With a conspiratorial smile, Maria invited me to take ad-
vantage of the situation. If I visited the library at a time when
                            T WO PA L E M B A N G S                     263
    Maria was the only staffer present, she could escort me into the
    stacks. I would be free to browse at will, perhaps finding a news-
    paper article solving the mystery misfiled in some obscure corner
    and not recorded in the catalog.
          So one afternoon, I braved the demonstrations and drove
    into the city. To avoid the traffic gridlock I parked my vehicle at
    a supermarket two kilometers short of my destination and waved
    down an ojek, a motorcycle taxi, to cover the remaining distance.
    The young driver claimed to be an expert at avoiding the con-
    gested areas. He took me along a labyrinth of back alleys, some
    scarcely wider than the motorcycle handlebars. Emerging from
    one such alley I was surprised to find myself directly across the
    street from the library. I paid him a generous fee, then threaded
    my way through the stationary mass of automobiles clogging the
    street and entered the building.
          I bypassed the microfilm repository in the public area
    and took the elevator to the top floor, where Maria waited.
    She gave me a pair of cotton gloves and instructed me on the
    safe handling of the fragile volumes. Then she pulled open the
    heavy doors and ushered me inside.
          I shivered, both because of the sudden chill of the climate-
    controlled room and the anticipation of what I might find. Maria
    indicated the shelves containing newspapers published in Bata-
    via in the post-war period and left me to browse. I soon forgot
    my research agenda and immersed myself in that bygone period.
    Advertisements for long-discontinued products and present-tense
    descriptions of unfolding events evoked vivid memories and pow-
    erful emotions. I became lost in my reminiscences.
          Sometime later, Maria approached and said that she would
    be closing the archive in a half hour. A moment later I found
    a binder containing the 1948 editions of Bataviaasch Nieuws-
    blad, which had been filed with editions from another decade. I
264                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
was quite familiar with the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad: it had been
my favorite Dutch-language newspaper when living in Batavia
attending medical school. Published from 1885 to 1957, Batavi-
aasch Nieuwsblad had been the voice of the Indos, Dutch people
born and raised in the Netherlands East Indies. The newspaper
was often critical of the colonial government, and would slyly
tweak the overly sensitive noses of the authorities while ostensi-
bly toeing the line. In fact, the style was quintessentially Javanese:
outwardly servile and accommodating while employing clever
phrasing and sophisticated literary allusion to suggest a much-
different, even subversive, meaning.
      I leafed through the pages, finding nothing of interest until
I opened to the front page of the 11 October 1948 edition. Be-
low the fold was a headline about RI-002 being forced to land
in Palembang. The story quoted sources stating that RI-002 had
landed in Palembang with “a load of gold.”
      I read the story, finding no information which I had not pre-
viously encountered in my decade of research. I then glanced at
the accompanying photo. My heart raced and I let out an audible
gasp. The grainy photograph was a head-on shot of a Dakota,
bearing the RI-002 insignia above the nose, parked on an airfield
and guarded by a single soldier. I turned the pages slowly, scruti-
nizing each article for possible information. The following edition
contained an official denial by the colonial government of any
knowledge of the whereabouts of the aircraft. No mention was
made of the previous edition's photograph purporting to show
RI-002 parked on a Dutch-controlled airfield.
      I continued to turn pages. An article in the 15 October
edition detailed the request by Senator Clyde Reed for the as-
sistance of the American consulate in verifying the rumors that
Bob was in Dutch detention. Subsequent editions reported that
the on-site inspection by the American consular official produced
                           T WO PA L E M B A N G S                     265
R I -0 0 2 u n d e r Dut ch g ua rd
on t h e m i l i t a r y a ir f ield a t
K ara n g e n d a h
      266                                ONE MAN AIR FORCE
no evidence that a Dakota had landed there recently. The Dutch
then used that finding to support their own claims that they knew
nothing of the fate of RI-002.
     An article published on 22 October told of the independent
efforts by Bob's parents to track down their son, working through
a legal firm in Pittsburg, Kansas. Their lawyer stated that a “trust-
worthy person” had seen Bob in Dutch detention. The final two
articles, dated 27 and 29 October, speculated about the fate of RI-
002, suggesting that Bob had somehow absconded with the gold
to points unknown. I had the strong feeling that the newspaper
editors were up to their old tricks, and knew more than they let
on. The final article closed with the phrase: “...we can expect the
missing person will soon be found”.
      I returned to the photograph, studying it closely, trying to
discern more indications that I was indeed looking at RI-002
parked on an airfield known to the Dutch as Palembang II, but
which I knew as Karangendah. The low smudges in the back-
ground could well be the distant foothills of the Bukit Barisan.
But without definitive proof that the photograph had not been
taken earlier on some Republican field (perhaps with a soldier as-
signed to shoo away the curious locals) I could not be sure.
                          T WO PA L E M B A N G S                     267
          33
          WESTERLING
          SWEEP
          —
          JO G JAKA RTA — J AVA
          December 1948 – June 1949
    At dawn on 19 December 1948, Kitty Hawk fighters and Mitch-
    ell B-25 bombers appeared from the south, heading directly
    toward Maguwo air base. We had no time to react; the bomb-
    ers destroyed our rag-tag armada even as our pilots ran to-
    ward our few serviceable aircraft.
          Dutch paratroopers landed a few minutes later, swiftly over-
    coming our lightly armed airmen. Maguwo was in enemy hands
    by seven a.m. During the subsequent hours, Dakota transports
    landed troops who marched on Jogjakarta as mechanized infan-
    try columns arrived from the north. By late afternoon, the Repub-
    lic of Indonesia had been conquered.
          Soekarno and Sjahrir fled to Kaliurang, where they joined
    Hatta and other senior Republican officials. As Dutch troops ap-
    proached, the three civilian leaders chose to surrender. General
    Sudirman and other senior military commanders vigorously pro-
    tested this decision, insisting that the civilian leaders follow them
    along the escape routes in the densely forested mountain slopes to
    guerrilla camps in the surrounding hinterland. However, I believe
    that our president and vice-president made a wise choice. They
    were diplomats and politicians with no experience in field op-
268                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
erations. Hiding in the mountain forests, unable to communicate
with the outside world, they would have been more of a burden
to their protectors than an effective means of propaganda.
      On the other hand, as heads of state held in detention like
common criminals, they were able to exploit their captivity for
diplomatic leverage, precipitating the first of many public-rela-
tions disasters the Dutch would suffer during the coming months.
      Some of our key military and civilian officials also meekly
surrendered to the Dutch, though their logistical and managerial
skills would have been useful in the field. This, to my mind, con-
firms my suspicion that their mission had been to pursue goals not
aligned with the secular, democratic nationalism of the Republic.
      Like these officers, I elected to stay in Jogjakarta, though
I had no intention of surrendering. I had a new bride to pro-
tect. Ironically, Ani had to leap to my own defense the after-
noon of the invasion. Shortly after nightfall Ani and I, along
with many others, were detained by Dutch troops as we passed
through the market on our way home.
     “Oh dear!” I whispered to Ani, “It's a Westerling Sweep.”
      This was bad news indeed. Speaking fluent Dutch, Ani ar-
gued with the sergeant, distracting attention while I surrepti-
tiously chewed and swallowed my Air Force identification papers.
The sergeant told Ani that she was free to go. However, I would
be detained for interrogation. Adopting the imperious attitude
that all high-born Javanese women can summon when neces-
sary, Ani berated the sergeant.
     “Very well,” she said, “but one of you must escort
me home. It is not seemly for a married woman to be
alone on the street at this hour!”
      Trapped between duty and gallantry, the sergeant was sty-
mied. He looked around helplessly. Then, another Dutch soldier
                        WESTERLING SWEEP                           269
    appeared. Dressed in khaki, he wore no insignia, but his confi-
    dent manner, and the deference afforded him by the sergeant and
    troops, left no doubt as to who was in command.
          Fearing an ambush, the presumed officer forbade the troops
    to enter a native area. Ani then demanded to know why I was
    being detained. The officer explained that the khaki pants I wore
    indicated I might be a rebel soldier.
         “The nerve!” Ani retorted. “My husband is wearing
    those ugly things only because they are the only pants avail-
    able in the market. Because of your blockade, we have to
    wear whatever rags we can find!”
          I struggled to keep a grin off my face as the officer endured
    a tongue-lashing from this mere slip of a native girl. Finally, he let
    both of us go, and we hurried home to plan our next move.
          The soldiers of the Siliwangi brigade elected to return to west-
    ern Java, feeling they would be more effective and have greater
    value to the cause if staging guerrilla harassment of Dutch troops
    from their home territory. Ani and I decided to join them. Though
    married and under my protection, Ani felt that she should seek
    her father’s blessing for such an unheard of undertaking for the
    young daughter of an elite Javanese family.
          Her father did agree, reluctantly, but insisted that Ani take her
    servant with her. This unfortunate teenage girl, whose family had
    served Ani's for two centuries, was the brunt of jokes about her “feu-
    dal” status in our band of classless revolutionaries. It did not help
    that she once stumbled and fell, with a great clatter of pots and pans,
    as we passed only a hundred meters from a Dutch outpost.
          When the brigade reached the town of Buitenzorg, now Bo-
    gor, in the northern foothills of the Parahyangan range, Ani and I
    left the group and continued to nearby Batavia. There, I worked
    with the Republican resistance fighters while, on the other side
    of the globe, our diplomats maintained relentless pressure at the
270                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
United Nations and other international forums. The Dutch ag-
gression had unleashed a global wave of outrage. The United
States, which had fought for an equitable solution as the neutral
member of the Committee of Good Offices, was furious. An in-
vestigation had revealed that the cost of maintaining military ac-
tions in Indonesia was precisely equal to the amount the United
States was donating, under the Marshall Plan, for reconstruction
of war-ravaged infrastructure in the Netherlands itself. As calls
intensified for the Dutch to fully withdraw from their former col-
ony, the United Nations Security Council met to debate the final,
definitive answer to the “Indonesia Question”.
      In June 1949, for the second time in three years, I made a
triumphant return by air into Jogjakarta after sneaking out by
land. The first occasion, of course, was on the first CALI block-
ade run a few weeks after smuggling myself to Singapore by sea.
Now, six months after our long march across Java, Ani and I
rode a United Nations aircraft from the future capital of our
free nation: now known as Jakarta.
      Suryadarma again assigned me to a desk, but this time I
executed these quotidian tasks with a full heart. The Air Force
was taking over military aviation facilities from the Dutch.
Our first task was to determine exactly what we had inherited
from our former masters so we could apply the scarce resourc-
es in the most efficient manner.
      My unit was responsible for transferring administrative re-
cords from colonial aviation authorities to our files. Never have I
felt a more profound satisfaction from the simple act of pushing
paper. Each inventory form or operational report that crossed
my desk represented a part of our lives passing from our former
masters into our own control; another brick in the foundation on
which we would build our sovereign nation.
                         WESTERLING SWEEP                           271
          On 23 January 1950, scarcely three weeks after the Dutch
    formally handed over control of all the East Indies (except Dutch
    New Guinea) to the United States of Indonesia, Raymond Wester-
    ling led a band of armed men into Bandung. In the year since his
    discharge, Westerling (perhaps, until his death, with the assistance
    of General Spoor) had been assembling a covert armed faction
    from colonial army soldiers loyal to the Dutch, including a hand-
    ful of European military personnel, and surprisingly, the Hizbul-
    lah Mujahideen guerrillas. They encountered almost no resistance
    as they entered the city: Republican soldiers were taking their
    triumphant and long-overdue break in their home villages. The
    rebels were lightly armed, and so headed to a warehouse where
    they expected to find a cache of arms and ammunition. They
    found only empty space as an alarm was sounded in surround-
    ing villages. Republican guerrillas rushed back to the city and
    the rebels made a hasty retreat. Westerling fled the archipelago,
    the indigenous soldiers scattered, and the Hizbullah Mujahideen
    retreated into the hinterlands, where they would wage guerrilla
    war for the next decade in an attempt to realize their dream of
    establishing an Islamic Caliphate.
          A few days afterward, I read newspaper reports of the inci-
    dent, which included photographs of Westerling. I was struck by
    his strong resemblance to the commander of the soldiers who had
    detained Ani and me in Jogjakarta on the afternoon of the Dutch
    invasion. Westerling was not formally discharged from the mili-
    tary until January 1949; it was entirely possible that he had been
    Spoor's “eyes on the ground” in Jogjakarta. If my assumption is
    correct, it would be an ironic and satisfying footnote to our strug-
    gle that the Butcher of Makassar had been bested by a Jogja girl.
272                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
       34
       SHABBY
       DRESS
       —
       JA K A RTA
       October 1998
One silver lining of the economic and social clouds of the past year
was the welcome relief from Jakarta's maddening traffic congestion.
For the first time in decades, all parts of the city were easily accessible
from any other—at least when there were no street protests. So, on
Saturday 24 October 1998, the elderly veterans I had invited to our
fiftieth wedding anniversary were able to make the trip to my home
in the southern suburbs of the capital without undue convenience.
       Their automobiles provided graphic evidence of the differ-
ent paths we had taken in life since working shoulder-to-shoulder
in a besieged town or braving Dutch fighter patrols in the skies.
Several of my guests arrived in brand-new luxury sedans; others
pulled up in older models of the ubiquitous Kijang family van.
There were three motorcycles and, reminiscent of our days in Jog-
jakarta, an onthel, a sturdy bicycle of Dutch design still manufac-
tured in great numbers in Java.
       Ani and the house staff had prepared a simple meal reminis-
cent of our earliest days of revolution: tahu, tempe, ikan teri, bun-
til, though in servings far larger than our meals of a half-century
before, and with a side selection of more substantial dishes and
ceremonial delicacies appropriate to the occasion.
                            SHABBY DRESS                                    273
           After dinner, my guests sat enthralled as I related the story
     of my decade-long quest to solve the mystery of RI-002, my tale
     illustrated with photocopies of newspaper clippings and official
     documents. My guests took particular interest in the published
     newspaper photograph purporting to show RI-002 on a Dutch
     airfield I had found in the newspaper archives the previous week.
           We gathered around the photograph and peered at the blurry
     image. None of the guests, who, among them, had visited every air
     base in Indonesia, could verify that the location was Karangendah.
     That is not surprising. After independence, control of the Karangen-
     dah facility had not passed back to the Air Force. Instead, the Army
     had taken possession, and used the runway as a tank training ground.
     No one from the Air Force had set foot on Karangendah since 1947.
           I brought out my magnifying class and we stared at the fig-
     ure of the soldier. The man was unmistakably Indonesian, but
     the image was not sufficiently clear for us to discern whether
     he wore the uniform of a colonial-forces soldier or a Republi-
     can airman, as both were similar.
           Then, one of the guests exclaimed: “Aduh, prajurit itu rapih
     sekali!” My word, that soldier is very neatly dressed!
           We laughed, remembering the threadbare uniforms we
     wore with such pride a half-century before. Then I considered
     what that remark might signify.
           If one of our soldiers had been so fortunate as to have a uni-
     form with all components in good repair, he would have traded
     his good shirt or trousers for a comrade's ragged one, so each
     would have at least one item of decent clothing. It was improb-
     able that a Republican soldier would have such a well-kept uni-
     form at that late stage of our struggle. As final confirmation, we
     noted that the soldier was standing in the op de plaats rust “at
     ease” position used by the Dutch army, not in the Japanese-style
     yasume stance used by our soldiers at the time.
2 74                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      Hearing those words, I sat back in my chair, my heart both
thrilled and at peace. After almost a decade, I had stumbled upon
the solution to the mystery of Bob Freeberg and RI-002. Based
on this revelation, and my decade of research, I could compile
a complete narrative of events.
      On the afternoon of 1 October 1948 RI-002 was intercepted by
Dutch fighters lying in wait shortly after taking off from the refueling
stop at Branti. The Dakota was escorted northward and forced to
land at Karangendah airstrip, then known as Palembang II.
      After a few days of detention in Karangendah, the Indo-
nesian crew members were told that they were free to leave, as
only their captain could be held legally responsible for the “il-
legal transport of gold”. In Bob's absence, Bambang Saptoadji
took command, convincing Samaun Bakri that their best course
of action was to return to Jogjakarta so Bakri could report the
brazen theft of the gold directly to his president. For Bambang, of
course, landing a Dakota right at Air Force headquarters would
have been a triumph for all to witness; a feat far greater than
Moeljono's solo flight of the twin-engine Avro Anson from Bukit-
tinggi to Jogjakarta some months previously.
      Several fighters trailed RI-002 southward from Palembang
II. As the Dakota neared Mount Punggur, they approached and
opened fire. Bambang attempted the evasion tactics Bob had dem-
onstrated two weeks previously. Though the copilot was capable
of controlling a Dakota during normal flight conditions, pushing
the lumbering aircraft through contour-hugging turns in moun-
tainous terrain far exceeded his ability. He sent RI-002 into a
full-power stall, causing the battered old Dakota to tilt and pitch
down, plowing into the densely forested mountain slope, where it
would remain, undetected, for three decades.
      While the Indonesian crew lay dead on Mount Punggur, Bob
was moved to a military base in Palembang, then some weeks
                            SHABBY DRESS                                 275
    later taken on board a Dutch warship to Tanjung Pinang. While
    being transferred from the ship, he managed to slip a note to a
    dock worker, who later passed it to an American suspected gun-
    runner who had just been released from the very prison where
    Bob awaited an unknown fate. From that prolific letter writer,
    who chronicled the drama, pathos, humor, and spirit of our strug-
    gle for freedom, the last known communication was a single word
    scrawled on a scrap of paper: “Freeberg”.
276                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      EPILOGUE
      —
      BY EKO MUHAT MA KARTOD I R D J O
My father, Petit Muharto Kartodirdjo, passed away peacefully in
March 2000, after a long, eventful, and blessed life. Though he did
not live to see his manuscript published, the story of Bob Freeberg
and RI-002 did not, as he had feared, follow him to his grave.
      My father had known from the start that writing this book
would not be easy. Petit Muharto had been a controversial figure
in Indonesian society. Educated by the Dutch and openly elitist, he
had participated in an American-supported rebellion against Presi-
dent Soekarno in the late 1950s. The rebellion failed, and our fam-
ily was exiled to Malaysia until Soekarno was deposed by Gen-
eral Soeharto a decade later. Though sufficiently rehabilitated to
find employment as a business executive negotiating public-works
contracts with senior government officials, my father knew that he
would be courting official disapproval by describing aspects of our
struggle for independence that many would prefer to be forgotten.
      In the official version of history mandated by Soeharto's
New Order government, Indonesian independence had been at-
tained solely through the bravery and sacrifice of Indonesians
themselves. Foreigners played no part in this narrative. But
my father's book argued that a foreigner, Bob Freeberg, had
played a crucial and perhaps decisive role in our struggle; his
own financial and physical sacrifices comparable to those of our
brave boys on the battlefield.
                             EPILOGUE                               277
          My father feared that reaction to his book would be swift and
    savage. He therefore meticulously outlined the methodology and
    results of his researches, building his case in logical steps using only
    documented facts. As in an academic dissertation or legal brief, he
    avoided speculation or opinion, leaving no opportunity for attacks
    on his character and personal history. And true to his upper-class
    Javanese upbringing, my father offered a number of plausible alter-
    native solutions to the mystery, so he could not be accused of defam-
    ing parties responsible for the disappearance and subsequent events.
          To ensure that his book would be first analyzed and judged
    by the intellectual elite, and not the popular press, he wrote in
    English, a language he had spoken since childhood and that few
    Indonesians have mastered sufficiently for serious reading. Unfor-
    tunately, my father completed his manuscript just as the economic
    crisis of the late 1990s (which also drove away much of the na-
    tion's expatriate population) collapsed the market for English-
    language publications. By the time the market for such books had
    recovered, my father had passed on.
          Nevertheless, by the middle of the decade, the story of Bob
    Freeberg and RI-002 had gained new life, in large part due to
    the efforts of two resourceful and energetic women on opposite
    sides of the globe. Tamalia Alisjahbana, a daughter of Sutan Tak-
    dir Alisjahbana, a leading intellectual figure of Indonesia's found-
    ing generation, has been a friend of the Kartodirdjo family since
    childhood. As Executive Director of the National Archive Build-
    ing Foundation, a prestigious historical society based in Jakarta,
    in June 2006 she hosted Donald Rumsfeld, at the time the U.S.
    Secretary of Defense and making an official visit to Indonesia,
    on a tour of the building's museum of national history. Know-
    ing that Rumsfeld had been a Navy pilot and maintained a deep
    interest in military history, Tamalia related the story of Bob Free-
278                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
berg and RI-002. Rumsfeld was fascinated, and offered the assis-
tance of his department to source Freeberg’s wartime records and
other related items of interest.
      In Kansas, Bob Freeberg's home state, a member of the Free-
berg clan was conducting her own investigations. Paul Freeberg
had given his daughter Marsha Freeberg Bickham a collection of
two hundred letters that his older brother had written to the fam-
ily while in Asia. Like Petit Muharto, Marsha Bickham attempted
to piece together the full story by requesting declassification of
American diplomatic dispatches and intelligence reports. Working
a decade later and through different channels, Bickham managed
to find some documents that my father had missed. Though none
of the evidence (all secondhand, single-source reports) satisfies the
strict protocols for verification of historical records, the sheer vol-
ume of material led her to the plausible conclusion that Bob Free-
berg had been captured by the Dutch and had died in detention.
      In Jakarta, Tamalia Alisjahbana planned to mount a major
exhibition about the story of Bob Freeberg at the National Ar-
chives Building, using photographs and other materials contrib-
uted by the American department of Defense, the Indonesian Air
Force, the Kartodirdjo family, and many others. As part of the
preparations for the exhibition, the US Embassy in Jakarta con-
tacted the Freeberg family in Kansas. Marsha Bickham took this
opportunity to formally request the assistance from her govern-
ment to investigate the RI-002 mystery. This, however, presented
a problem. While diplomatic officials had a mandate to publicize
examples of good relations between Indonesia and America, they
could not assign resources to investigating the historical actions of
a private citizen in matters unrelated to security or other national
interests. Nevertheless, some embassy staff members, notably Ari-
fin Pramono of the Library of Congress Representative Office in
Jakarta, stepped forward. He devoted considerable effort during
                               EPILOGUE                                 279
    his own time to investigating the mystery, including employing
    his diplomatic and academic credentials to request classified re-
    cords from Dutch military archives. But even the material from
    this source, unavailable to other researchers, failed to yield defini-
    tive proof of whether Bob Freeberg had died on a mountainside
    in Sumatra or had met a more nefarious fate.
          The week-long exhibition at the National Archives Building
    in May 2009 generated a brief burst of interest in the case, includ-
    ing a major article about Bob Freeberg and RI-002 in The Smith-
    sonian, the magazine of the American national museum. However,
    another aim of the exhibition, pushing for recognition from the
    Indonesian government of the contribution of Bob Freeberg to
    the building of the Indonesian nation, has not been realized.
          A few weeks after the exhibition I received an email message
    from Canadian writer Jeremy Allan, asking about an image I had
    posted on an aviation blog showing RI-002 (with my father on
    board) lifting off from the improvised runway laid on a remote beach
    in southwest Java. Further correspondence revealed, to my surprise
    and delight, that Jeremy, who had lived in Indonesia for decades, was
    the same writer who had interviewed my father at length about Bob
    Freeberg in 1986. My father had so approved of the resulting news-
    paper article that he showed it to all he met during subsequent days.
    However, he was appalled to discover that few were aware of the
    story of Bob Freeberg and his service to the Indonesian nation. That
    disappointing revelation had been a major factor that convinced my
    father that he must set the story of Bob Freeberg down on paper to
    ensure that the story of RI-002 was not lost to history.
          With the publication of this book, the story of Bob Freeberg
    will forever be a part of the history of my nation. I also hope that
    this book will encourage young Indonesians to investigate this
    almost-forgotten chapter in the story of Indonesia, and, perhaps,
    find further evidence to confirm my father's solution to the mys-
    tery of Bob Freeberg and RI-002.
280                           ONE MAN AIR FORCE
      ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
      —
      Bringing one of the great untold stories of Indonesian history
to print required years of effort and the contributions of a large
number of dedicated people. The story about telling the story of
Bob Freeberg and RI-002 began in 1986 when Sabam Siagian, then
managing editor of The Jakarta Post, sent Jeremy Allan, then a
foreign intern with the newspaper, to interview his old friend Petit
Muharto Kartodirdjo about the early days of Indonesian aviation.
The publication of the resultant article would be the first of sever-
al events encouraging Muharto to set pen to paper, ensuring that
future generations of Indonesians would know of the remarkable
role that Bob Freeberg had played in the founding of their nation.
      During the decade Muharto worked on his manuscript, he
benefited from the assistance of numerous friends and colleagues
to track down witnesses and next-of-kin of RI-002 crew members.
Helpful staff members of libraries in Indonesia and abroad guided
Muharto through the labyrinthine periodical archives and restrict-
ed collections of out-of-print books about revolutionary times in
Indonesia. Though this was not an officially sponsored investiga-
tion, the Indonesian Air Force opened their records to Muharto
and offered support wherever possible. During later stages of pre-
paring the original manuscript, the late Air Vice Marshall R. Su-
nario provided valuable editorial advice about the events from his
perspective as a former senior Air Force commander.
                        ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                              281
          Special note should be made of Pamela Hyde White, who, in
    her capacity as an official of the United States Information Service
    in Jakarta, and later back in the United States in her spare time, un-
    locked a vast American archive of classified historical documents
    relating to post-war Indonesia, providing many tantalizing clues
    to Bob Freeberg's eventual fate.
          The passing of Petit Muharto Kartodirdjo in March 2000,
    and a subsequent failed attempt to publish the book in Jakarta,
    raised fears that the story of Bob Freeberg might indeed be lost to
    history. Then Tamalia Alisjahbana, a life-long friend of the Kar-
    todirdjo family, single-handedly rekindled interest in the story of
    RI-002. In her capacity as Director of the prestigious National
    Archive Building Foundation, Tamalia began to gather artifacts
    relating to RI-002 and the role of aviation in the founding of In-
    donesia. In this effort she was ably assisted by William Tuchrello,
    regional representative for the US Library of Congress, along with
    Arifin Pramono and other members of his staff, who devoted con-
    siderable effort to assist Tamalia in obtaining exhibits and docu-
    ments from American archives and authorities. The exhibition of
    these artifacts, RI-002: Traces of a Friendship, mounted in May
    2009 in the National Archives Museum in Jakarta, generated sig-
    nificant coverage in the local press, and a feature article about
    Bob Freeberg in The Smithsonian, the official magazine of the
    national museum of the United States.
          The exhibition and subsequent articles were also the catalyst
    that sparked the idea of publishing a book about the contribution
    of Bob Freeberg to the founding of the nation of Indonesia. The
    chance encounter of Petit Muharto's eldest son, Eko Muhatma
    Kartodirdjo, with Jeremy Allan quickly led to the commission-
    ing of this book. As the project gained momentum, numerous
    acquaintances and contacts with an interest in aviation and his-
    tory stepped forward with information and assistance. Lieutenant
282                          ONE MAN AIR FORCE
Colonel Drs. Sudarno and his staff at the Indonesian Aviation Mu-
seum in Jogjakarta provided every opportunity to inspect and ana-
lyze the physical remnants of the RI-002 wreckage in their care.
      The Freeberg family in the United States provided consid-
erable assistance. Barbara Freeberg Meyer, who carries on the
Freeberg aviation tradition as a participant in international kite
competitions, and Donald Freeberg, who had actually met his
uncle when a young boy, verified several anecdotes concerning
Freeberg's youth in Kansas. Jiya Freeberg Sarma contributed
transcriptions of letters sent by Freeberg to the family, while the
diligent research efforts of Marsha Freeberg Bickham supplied
information that supported many of Petit Muharto's conclusions.
      Dutch author and publisher Bart Santema assisted research
by sourcing and summarizing relevant Dutch-language material.
Crucially, he also introduced Jeremy to Eugene Verspoor, a Dutch
national resident in Bali whose father, Major General (Retired)
Paul Verspoor, had been a fighter squadron commander based
in Medan. Though Paul Verspoor had no direct knowledge of
the fate of RI-002, his clear memories of aviation-related events
during the struggle for Indonesian independence confirmed
a number of important details.
      The Indonesian media maintained a constant interest in the
story. A two-part television documentary by Amanda Valani and
her crew at Metro TV in March 2012 led to a number of people
offering further information. Six months later, a major event or-
ganized by William Tuchrello and John Choi of @America, a US-
sponsored cultural center in Jakarta, generated another flurry of
interest and additional offers of information.
     Jeremy Allan first learned of the Indonesian struggle for in-
dependence through encounters with the founding generation of
Indonesian artists, including Soedjana Kerton, who had sketched
                        ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                            283
    illustrations for The Patriot, a newspaper published in revolution-
    ary Jogjakarta. His daughter, Tjandra Kerton, generously granted
    us permission to include some of these sketches in the book.
          Several colleagues with no connection to the story made
    their own significant contributions. The manuscript underwent
    numerous revisions as new information was incorporated. At
    various stages over the years, John Moyle, Byron Black, Dean
    Tolhurst, Paul Clifford, Franklin Crum, Jessie Morgan, Joann Da-
    vida, Kelsey Schober, and Julien Espagne kindly donated time to
    close readings of the manuscript to ensure that the difficult and
    complex subject matter and sequences of events would be com-
    prehensible to readers with little prior knowledge of Indonesian
    culture, geography, or history.
          During the initial stages of the project, Jeremy's long-time
    friend and professional mentor Leonard Lueras provided connec-
    tions with people interested in the Bob Freeberg story and contrib-
    uted the creative guidance required to focus this epic, multi-facet-
    ed tale into a coherent narrative with wide appeal. Frank Morgan
    also graciously donated valuable material and moral support, as
    well as offering insights based on his uniquely broad and deep
    knowledge of Indonesian business, culture, law, and society.
284                         ONE MAN AIR FORCE
       ABOUT THE AUTHORS
       —
Petit Muharto Kartodirdjo
—
Born in 1919 into the close-knit family of a colonial-era civil servant, Pe-
tit Muharto Kartodirdjo witnessed and in many cases participated in the
seminal events of modern Indonesian history. Named, like his four sib-
lings, after an instrument in the Javanese gamelan orchestra, Petit Muhar-
to was a staunch proponent of both traditional social customs and values
and the nationalist goal of creating a modern nation of Indonesia. During
the course of an eventful life, Petit Muharto served his a nation as a school
teacher, military officer, and diplomat. He and his family also spent many
years in exile, a consequence of following his moral compass instead of the
political winds of the day. Petit Muharto was eventually welcomed back
into Indonesia and spent the last decades of his life as a corporate execu-
tive and then in comfortable retirement, during which time he undertook
his investigations of the mysterious disappearance of his friend Bob Free-
berg. Petit Muharto Kartodirdjo passed away peacefully in March 2000.
Jeremy Allan
—
Born in Vancouver, Canada in 1953, Jeremy Allan took up residence in
Indonesia in 1980. Since that time he has followed eclectic career as an oil
field surveyor, travel writer, television producer, magazine editor, advertis-
ing copywriter, and author. Through this time he has used his extensive
familiarity with his adoptive nation's culture, society, and history to intro-
duce the people and places of the Indonesian archipelago to a global read-
ership through various media, including his two previous books, Jakarta
Jive and Bali Blues. Jeremy Allan now devotes his time to assisting young
Indonesians to polish their English language writing skills to international
standard, so they can tell their own stories to the world.
On 30 September 1948, American pilot Bobby          “What emerges from this story is two highly
Earl Freeberg fired up the twin engines of his      intelligent, courageous and stubborn men
war-surplus C-47 cargo airplane, designated         who were moved by injustice and willing
                                                    to fight against it.” — Tamalia Alisjahbana,
RI-002, for a mission to transport 250 kilo-
                                                    Independent Observer
grams of gold bullion from Java to Sumatra in
preparation for an expected Dutch invasion of       “One Man Air Force is a fascinating tale
Indonesian territory. RI-002 then vanished, the     of the bravery and ingenuity that attended
                                                    Indonesia’s birth. It recalls an era of heroic
wreckage only found 30 years later in the re-
                                                    idealism that should always be cherished.” —
mote Sumatra highlands.                             Michael Vatikiotis, author of Blood and Silk
The mysterious disappearance of Bob Freeberg
                                                    “History, revolution, adventure, thriller, mys-
was the final, ironic twist in one of the most      tery, exotic tropical setting, dashing young
dramatic-and least-known-chapters in the story      pilot risking his life for an aspiring republic -
of Indonesia. For sixteen months, Bob Freeberg      what’s not to like about One Man Air Force?”
                                                    — Julia Suryakusuma, author of Julia’s Jihad
ran the Dutch blockade, flying in critical supplies
such as medicines, and carrying out the diplo-
mats and experts who would make the case for
Indonesian independence to the world.
Now, the story of Bob Freeberg is told by the In-
donesian who knew him best. Air Force Captain
Petit Muharto Kartodirdjo flew with Freeberg as
official mission leader and (unofficial) copilot,
until being promoted and reassigned to head-
quarters shortly before the tragic final flight.
One Man Air Force is the dramatic account of
the birth of a nation, of two idealistic young                  afterhours
men from opposite ends of the globe forging a
close friendship, and a compelling tale of Petit      I S B N 978-602 -6990-18-1
Muharto’s efforts in later life to solve the mys-
tery of his friend’s disappearance.
ONE MAN AIR FORCE PETIT MUHARTO KARTODIRDJO
                  WITH JEREMY ALLAN
